---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Foreword

### Chinmayi Arun

When reading anything, we absorb the text through our particular gaze,
infused with our background and history. Here, I offer a lawyer’s
reading of a textured, interdisciplinary book that will benefit from
multiple readings. For lawyers like myself who tend to engage mainly
with the creation and application of rules, this book’s narratives are a
revelation. They illuminate the past with political theory, design
theory, philosophy, history, and sociology. The authors take a period of
time that is very familiar, and show us everything we missed as we lived
through it.

This book is an intertextual conversation across disciplines,
generations, and geographies. Since the authors are long-time
collaborators, it is also a conversation across time. This adds depth
and warmth to their engagement with each other. You will see, in the
three essays, the authors speak to each other’s writing, and also to
prior work, as they join voices to tell this story. Ruth Padel wrote of
migrations, in her poem ‘Time to Fly’, that ‘you go because the world
rotates, because the world is changing and you’ve lost the key’. This
book, by three individuals on three different continents, is also proof
that wherever you may go, you can come together and remake the key.

This is a book for everyone who cares about citizenship, technology, and
democracy, even though we have each formed our concerns and questions in
different contexts. In the first part of this foreword (‘Eye-opening’),
I discuss the authors’ repositioning of seemingly familiar history. The
second part (‘Crisis in India’) will resonate particularly with those
who are familiar with recent developments of law, politics, and
technology in India, and have a visceral interest in the meaning of
citizenship and democracy in India. This book shows us, step by step,
how technology and law have changed what it means to be a citizen in
India.

In the last part of my foreword (‘Yes, all democracies’), the crisis
discussed in this book is a crisis of democracy and citizenship that is
building worldwide. The authors’ pathbreaking scholarship offers
important questions and theories for anyone with an interest in
democracy. India is one of the most interesting democracies in the world
and is a great choice of canvas for the authors’ ideas. To understand
these ideas is to understand India a little. But to understand India is
to also understand how societies move toward and away from seeing
themselves as democracies.

## Eye-opening

The combined effect of the three authors’ narratives of how technology
has changed society is much more than the sum of its parts. This
narrative is informed by their personal and scholarly understanding of
the events that constructed and embedded the relationships between
technology, state, and society in India. The authors are able to
theorize these questions with a granularity of detail that is both
satisfying and enriching. Ashish Rajadhyaksha, for example, reflects on
the questions that the three authors were asking at the time that the
universal identity system was proposed, and details the developments
that changed both the nature of the system and the authors’ view of it.

As an Aadhaar-skeptic who has written about the deficiencies of the
statutory safeguards proposed for the system, I thought I had already
read about, heard of, or conceived its worst outcomes. For example, I
have always maintained that using statutory safeguards (as opposed to
constitutional obligations) to contain Aadhaar’s excesses can easily be
undone by the first legislature that is willing to remove the
safeguards. However, each of the authors surprised me by showing me
dimensions of this project that I did not know about, understand, or
envision.

Rajadhyaksha sketches out how the National Population Register and other
developments that directly threaten meaningful citizenship were able to
use or repurpose Aadhaar. While Nishant Shah has been coy about his past
work, Rajadhyaksha has devoted several pages to reminding us of Shah’s
past work on Aadhaar’s conflation of identity and identification. This
work was so insightful that it was cited in Justice Chandrachud’s 2018
dissenting judgment in the second Aadhaar case. But it is Nafis Hasan
who shines light on previously unplumbed questions in the context of
Aadhaar. He does this by showing us how the Indian government chose
particular technologies and private actors to create its databases, and
helps us understand how these choices affect citizens. Using a brilliant
blend of empirical research and theory, he shows us how datasets are
perceived as objective but can be compromised in several ways. The
particular paths chosen by the Indian government leave citizens with the
burden and labor of ensuring that their information is recorded
correctly. This part of the book is not only visionary in its own right,
it also shows us why Shah is right, now and in the past, about what
these databases do to the individual citizen.

I wonder how the Supreme Court judges who wrote the privacy and Aadhaar
judgments would read this book. Aadhaar, like many serious questions
before the Supreme Court, triggered a conversation between the judiciary
and the executive. In the case about the fundamental right to privacy,
in particular, the judges made assumptions about the restraint the
executive was likely to exercise in its invasion of privacy within the
broad space offered to it. One wonders if they would rule differently if
we could throw this book back in time to show benches past the future
their combined rulings constructed.

## Crisis in India

Indian readers will have lived through the period and events discussed
in this book, and others may have witnessed similar developments in
their countries. What we think we witnessed is transformed and
reconstructed by the authors’ narrative, framing, and retelling. If you
were wondering how and why we got here – how citizenship is now based on
a fragile and almost fickle digital ID, why protesting can get you
arrested, and what the Aarogya Setu was doing on anybody’s phone – this
is the book to read. It offers compelling insights to show us how India
got here, and ways to rethink where technology and society have taken
our democracy.

In March 2015, many celebrated the Indian Supreme Court’s decision in
*Shreya Singhal* v *Union of India*, which was widely regarded as the
first significant Indian judgment on online communication. During the
litigation, big technology companies were rallying support and
coordinating advocacy that would favor unrestricted online speech.
Public attention was focused on online speech. In the meantime, data
collection by these companies and by the state was expanding. The unique
identification system was being put in place, and state surveillance was
becoming more sophisticated and less accountable. Companies were
competing to invent new ways to collect and use data. At the time, very
little attention was being paid to privacy and to the ways in which
these companies violated it. The companies would go on to argue for some
years that granular privacy laws restricted innovation and were bad for
the population. They would also go on to privately restrict speech in
ways that would not have met the constitutional threshold if the state
had ordered the restriction.

The connection between Shreya Singhal and the events discussed in the
book is that this highly regarded judgment also displayed the judicial
shortsightedness that would be displayed in the court’s later rulings on
privacy and universal identity. The judiciary failed to appreciate the
extent to which the executive could censor information, if it was able
to negotiate directly with companies and leverage their gatekeeping role
without involving the citizens whose speech and information is made
inaccessible. The advocacy in the case also assumed that companies’
incentives would always lie in resisting censorship, and this optimism
did not survive the test of time. The story of Aadhaar was similarly a
story of not seeing what was in plain sight as well as what lay
concealed, both of which powerfully affected the form that the system
would take and the future it would create.

Parts of the book unearth new and important information. Other parts
reveal what was hidden in plain sight or obscured by how we were taught
to see. What, for example, has Aadhaar done to the meaning of
citizenship and choice? Does this change depend on the demographic to
which one belongs? Can this change be attributed only to Aadhaar or was
the universal identity system a part of a series of changes made to what
it means to be a citizen of India? For Indians, to read this book is to
understand the many ways in which the last decade has changed how
citizenship works. Rajadhyaksha characterizes these changes as ‘creep’.
While national attention focused on the questions framed and amplified
by policy wonks and news media influencers, creep was taking place. Shah
is looking at it from our point of view. We the user, or ‘yousers’ as he
prefers to think of us, suffer from information overload. Hasan
characterizes the problems as emerging in part from excess.

As Rajadhyaksha points out, it was difficult for many to understand the
full implications of the Unique Identification number or UID in its
initial stages. The trio who authored this book, along with my old
friend, brilliant lawyer-researcher Sruti Chaganti, were among the first
to study the project. Despite their meticulous work, they were – as we
all were - looking at only one corner of the picture. It is not only
Rajadhyaksha but also Hasan who surfaces everything that was unknown
then. Hasan’s chapter is revelatory because it shows us that the changes
began long before any of us imagined they did. Shah shows us that it was
not just the obscurement of changes in law and policy, but the
overriding of our cognitive capacity to take in the world and to think,
masked by the language of access and empowerment, that has made it
difficult to participate in the democracy as we should. Together, the
three authors offer an account of how technology has been used to
gradually restrict and stunt the capacities that flow from citizenship
in India.

## Yes, All Democracies

Although this is a book that will certainly be of interest to Indians,
the theory, the questions and the reimagining should be of interest to
anyone with an interest in technology, citizenship, and democracy. It
offers a rich interdisciplinary narrative of these questions that is
unusual. The compound vision of this book might be turned on other
countries, especially democracies that are skewing the way India has.

As a postcolonial democracy that is not ruled by colonial settlers,
India is acutely sensitive to questions of power, equality, and control.
When the information revolution began, India was one of the world’s most
interesting democracies. It was less than fifty years old then, and is
less than a hundred now. It is also a country that was, and is,
constantly learning and remaking itself, with a momentum toward change
that has been steered in varying directions. India has moved rapidly
toward increasing equality and then, perhaps even more rapidly, toward
eradicating equality. It has invested heavily in the public sector and
then privatized aggressively as it took its neoliberal turn.

The authors have a deep and nuanced understanding of the country. As you
will see, this ease of navigating the past and its meaning allows them
to reimagine narratives about technology and citizenship, and also
allows them to show us how to ask the right questions and how to
understand how technology and a democracy affect each other.
Additionally, as international scholars, they are able to situate this
narrative within a broader global and theoretical context. If Lisa
Gitelman’s book *Raw Data is an Oxymoron* discussed why there is no such
thing as raw data, and danah boyd showed us the real nature of
enmeshment of technology and human society, then these three authors
show us the ways in which technology and private interest are entwined
within democracy, and between citizens and states.

The phases of technology in democracy that this book takes us through –
the euphoria, and use of the language of rights to allow technology to
permeate society unrestricted – will be familiar to most people in most
democracies. Similarly, the use of the language of freedom to usher in
insidious changes of unfreedom has also been a global phenomenon. The
cycle outlined by the authors is one that infects many democracies at
different stages of having technological determinism creep into core
administrative systems while the population remains hooked on
entertaining videos. Like Shoshana Zuboff’s widely read *The Age of
Surveillance Capitalism* which describes the visible and invisible
changes that technology was precipitating in one country, this too is a
book that speaks to the world using India as its canvas.

As the authors took me through the last decade’s events, I asked myself
what it is about India that seems make it particularly fertile ground
for all the most difficult questions of technology and society to grow.
Perhaps it is the way forceful neoliberalism came into contact with
strong constitutionalism in ways that affect a very large percentage of
the people of the world. Perhaps it is also the place that India
occupies in both the creation and the consumption of technology, with
populations and participation that are highly visible and entirely
invisible in turn. This book not only helps us understand what has come
to pass, but also helps us ask more questions.
