---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# INTRODUCTION

## Data Without Content, or the Medium With no Message

In February 2015, India’s Supreme Court delivered a landmark judgment on
the right to speech.[^05MainIntroduction_1] The issue was itself, certainly by today’s
standards, relatively insignificant – a Facebook post by a young woman
in the small town of Palghar, in Maharashtra, that another young woman
had ‘liked’ – that blew up when police arrested the two women under
something named Section 66A of India’s Information Technology Act, 2000,
which redefined India’s hallowed right to free speech into the digital
era.[^05MainIntroduction_2]

The Court easily agreed with the primary argument of the petitioners on
the specific question of free speech. This was the easier part, for, as
legal scholar Pranesh Prakash wrote, it would have taken ‘a highly
clever lawyer and a highly credulous judge to make ‘liking’ of a
Facebook status update an act capable of being charged with
electronically “sending … any information that is grossly offensive or
has menacing character”’.[^05MainIntroduction_3] Most lawyers also were agreed that, as
Prakash elsewhere unambiguously asserted, ‘‘liking’ is protected speech
under Article 19(1)(a)’.[^05MainIntroduction_4]

Justice Rohinton Nariman, who wrote the judgment, however went further.
He took the debate beyond the relatively settled domain of the content
of protected free speech and into a far more ambiguous and contested
space, namely the legal nature and the properties of data itself. In
seeking to regulate speech, the specific amendment to the Information
Technology Act that was now being challenged had sought to define speech
as *all* forms of digital storage and movement. ‘Section 66A’, Nariman
said, ‘casts the net very wide’, for it effectively seeks to control
‘all information that is disseminated over the internet’. Its diktat was
being sought to be extended, he pointed out, over any ‘computer,
computer system, computer resource or communication device including
attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic
record’.[^05MainIntroduction_5]

Could all of this data be even understood as speech? Speech in India has
a specific legal history. The right to speech is a key right, defined by
the Constitution of India as one of the cornerstones of the freedom that
India’s citizens had been promised with Independence. Such speech has
had particular meaning. It has defined speakers as conscious subjects
who know what they are saying, what meaning their speech can have, who
take responsibility for what they are saying. If what they are saying is
seen as dangerous, such danger ‘should not be remote, conjectural or
far-fetched’ but should have ‘proximate and direct nexus’ with what is
said.[^05MainIntroduction_6] Did all data disseminated over the internet produce such a
speaker? If not, how was it speech?

But even that wasn’t the real problem. The real problem was that, in
defining objectionable speech, the Act ‘refers only to the medium
through which such information is disseminated’. It was, reversing the
famous McLuhan dictum, as though the *message was now the medium*.
‘Information of all kinds is roped in’, Nariman went on. ‘Such
information may have scientific, literary or artistic value, it may
refer to current events, it may be obscene or seditious’, none of this
apparently made any difference to the regulator. As a result, ‘no
distinction is made between mere discussion or advocacy of a particular
point of view which may be annoying or inconvenient or grossly offensive
to some’ and the far more inflammatory ‘incitement by which such words
lead to an imminent causal connection with public disorder, security of
State etc’.[^05MainIntroduction_7]

\_\_\_\_\_\_

It may well be possible to read into Nariman’s view of data’s content
neutrality, and the potentially inflammatory nature of *all* data in the
paranoid view of the state censor, an inevitable if unintended afterlife
to Tim Berners-Lee’s original famous May 1990 conception of the ubiquity
of information on the internet – when a ‘web’ of ‘hypertext documents’
would become intelligible across browsers everywhere. Now it was
precisely the *illusion of its intelligibility* – the capacity of the
digital delivery mechanisms to simulate speech in the way they assumed
that universal accessibility automatically equated with damage – that
allowed police and judicial authorities to read whatever they chose into
it. It also made the sheer possession of any device traceable however
remotely to seemingly suspect data into a non-bailable criminal act.

A scant three years later, in another Supreme Court case in 2018,
Justice Nariman’s premonition was graphically on view when the eminent
historian Romila Thapar led a small group of senior academics to
challenge the legality of the arrest of five human rights activists and
lawyers.[^05MainIntroduction_8] In their rejoinder, the police made a series of
fantastical, ever-expanding claims of a nationwide conspiracy on the
part of the accused to overthrow the Indian state. They based this
entirely on ‘material retrieved from the computers, laptops, pen drives
and memory cards of \[…\] accused persons’. Such material, they
asserted, revealed the arrested ‘as active members of the Communist
Party of India (Maoist), a banned organisation, and reflected a design
of being involved in the commission of offences having the potential to
destabilise the country’. They had been, the police added, arrested ‘not
because of their political activities’ but for ‘selecting and
encouraging cadres in \[…\] banned organizations to go underground \[…\]
mobilizing and distributing money, facilitating selection and purchase
of arms, deciding the rates of such arms and suggesting the routes and
ways of smuggling such arms into India for \[…\] training and laying
booby traps and directional mines’.

None of this had been proved in any court. Instead, as Justice
Chandrachud pointed out, the police claimed at a press conference to
possess ‘more than sufficient evidence against the five individuals’
without indicating what this evidence was. Three days later, the judge
continued, ‘letters (many of which should form part of the case diary)
were selectively flashed and read out’ and ‘leaked to the media’, even
though the concerned officer admitted – once again only on television –
that ‘the letters which had been read out by him were still undergoing
forensic analysis together with the electronic devices’.[^05MainIntroduction_9] Since then,
as regards the specific detainees of the Bhima-Koregaon undertrials, a
US-based forensics company named Arsenal Consulting has shown, in its
own analysis of some of the disks owned by them, that significant
malware existed indicating the possibility of ‘planted’ evidence.
Although Arsenal’s report has been widely circulated, it too has not
appeared in Court evidence since the National Investigative Agency has
challenged the *locus standi* of this organization, and so it too hangs
– like the data the police claim to have – in a liminal ghostly
existence hovering over the actual legal process.

## Possession 

This book is centered around a proposition. ‘Somewhere’, says Nishant
Shah in his essay, ‘in the last few years, without us even realizing it,
and in an almost non-dramatic fashion, we have foundationally changed
our idea of who we are as information subjects’. The human being has
become ‘rehumanized’, ‘parsed, processed, and presented only through
interfaces that render it recognizable’.

The essays in this book address a relatively recent development: the
ever-expanding tsunami of data that surrounds, engulfs, and contaminates
us all, passes through our devices and implicates us in multiple
actions. We look at how the experience of both receiving and producing
data has transformed several basic concepts of democratic politics such
as citizenship, authorship, the right to life, to livelihood and to
speech, and indeed our experience of the public domain itself. Such data
defines us as much to the state as to online entities trying to access
us, sell us things, troll us, qualify or disqualify us, even as we on
our side relentlessly seek to understand and avail of an ever-expanding
range of new and often unfamiliar rights, goods, services, and
privileges available ‘online’.

This transformation has taken place within a relatively short span of
time. Although Nafis Hasan’s essay explores an essential 70s-80s
prequel, the book mostly covers a narrower period – between, as Nishant
Shah has it, the Information Technology Act of 2000 and Facebook’s Free
Basics project of 2016 or, as Ashish Rajadhyaksha suggests, between 2009
(when in a single month India announced its massive biometric Aadhaar
project and passed the draconian Section 66A) and 2020, which saw the
Supreme Court judgment on the longest and severest internet shutdown the
world has yet seen in Kashmir.[^05MainIntroduction_10]

In this time, we saw data – together with the manner of its gathering,
its location, its securing, and the ability to interpret it –
foundationally transform the basic armature of the modern state. In some
measure the technological transformation was built, Hasan argues, on the
arrival of RDBMS (or Relational Database Management System) to India.
Introduced as a corporate technology, and responsible for much of the
famous information technology boom of the 90s, it was the mounting of
governmental functioning onto RDBMS that reinvented governance itself
into something of a corporate-style service provider with the National
e-Governance Plan (NeGP) of 2006, and also thereby into what Indian
political scientist Partha Chatterjee has described as the ‘tactically
extended state’.[^05MainIntroduction_11] It transformed the modern state away from what
Hasan calls the constraints of ‘an overbearing fidelity to the
organizational design of bureaucracy, to its hierarchies and rules, as
well as to the computational design of information systems’ and into a
new era in which digital governance ‘clogs the information highway,
storms into the lanes, cracks, and crevices of daily life’.

A more complex register concerned the parallel morphing of several
universal and ‘unbound’ conceptions of identity into unrecognizable
avatars following the rise of targeted delivery of benefit alongside
equally targeted surveillance technologies. We began encountering a new
kind of subjectivity that surely rewrote the old Hegelian negotiation
between subjec*tion*, or the condition of being a sovereign subject
defined by the King and the State, and subjec*tivity*, or the individual
egotistic interiorization of both the freedoms and responsibilities of
the citizen-subject. Shah calls it a crossroads between being subjects
*of* information (where we spend much of our life producing, consciously
or otherwise, information about who we are, what we do, and how we
relate to the world around us), subjects *to* information (as
algorithmic data mining constantly produces information structures that
determine various markers of who we think we are), and *subjective to*
information (as we keep filtering everything that does not directly
pertain to us, produce a bias in favor of information that is customized
for our specific needs, and eventually find ourselves in filter bubbles,
‘echo chambers of network neighborhoods that protect us from people who
are unlike us’).

At all these stages we encounter informational excess as a condition of
existence, as we turn into subjects ‘whose *ontology* lies in
information overload’. Such an ‘ontology’, says Shah, is pivoted around
what may be the most basic, founding transformation taking place in our
‘rehumanization’: a move away from *representation*, upon which the
entire polity of the 20th century was based, and into *simulation*. It
is not, as we saw (in the Nariman judgment when free speech was being
sought to be re-simulated into media of data storage and dissemination)
a *break* from the past as much as it is the *re-signification* of the
classical public sphere, morphing its key concepts such as democracy or
rights into a new era that significantly redefines basic meaning-making
languages that have historically founded our representation-driven 20th
century. The shift from representation to simulation, paralleled by
further transformations from author*ity* to author*ization*, also forces
another transformation from older conditions of possibility to new
structures defined by probability.

This ontology is manifested in permanent systemic crisis, but it is a
crisis that, for perhaps the first time in history, has become
*naturalized*. It has even turned into an everyday state of being. As
human beings reconcile to their new condition (one that Hasan, on his
side, names ‘responsibilization’), they become ever-more dependent on
‘information-overload managing technologies’, even as these technologies
in turn ‘train’ human users to meet technology halfway. At the heart of
information overload, says Shah, is the argument that we are now in a
cybernetic feedback loop with ourselves, where we produce and consume
our own data, and engage with it through multiple terrains so that we no
longer can see outside of the data streams into which we are permanently
immersed.

Such humans are a new construct – ‘yousers’, Shah calls them – with new
claims, new promises (including, as he points out, the promise of
immortality that requires the older human to step out of the model of
being either human or relevant and to enter this new world where Google
would be their savior) and, most of all, transformed citizenship norms.
We are possessed by a ‘condition of informality’ that defines ‘our
authorship, which in turn defines who speaks, on behalf of whom, in what
voice, and with what authority’. It defines ‘agency, choice, freedom,
and truth’.

It also appears connected with what Hasan calls a *techne* of
neoliberalism that, while demanding a lesser or leaner government, often
actually *expands* regulation and domination through multiple seemingly
autonomous entities not part of the formal state apparatus but guided
instead by a corporate enterprise logic. Hasan sees it as a confluence
of two interconnected trajectories. One is precisely technological – the
‘electronification of governance’ redefined an old command-driven,
centralized planned economy into a new center-periphery imagination. The
second is more ideological, a neoliberal transformation of the
democratic state that allowed – often in the name of the very people
whose rights were being taken away – the conversion of state benefit
into elite privilege.

## Being Possessed By

The authors of this volume first came together in 2010. This was a year
after Aadhaar or the ‘Unique Identity for Every Indian Resident’ project
had been announced with much fanfare by the Government of India, under
which members of a large team were to research the grassroots social
impact of mass digitization. ‘The Identity Project’ (as we named it) ran
for three years, during which time we carried out detailed field
research in seven Indian states, generated a mound of documentation,
conducted four major workshops, and published three books.[^05MainIntroduction_12] The
multiple outcomes and findings of that particular project, on paper,
PDF, and video, have been p8ublished and are easily accessible.[^05MainIntroduction_13]

At that time, in 2010, we had sought – against, it must be said,
considerable pressure from numerous friends, coworkers, and colleagues
who offered grim forebodings about this new development and saw
totalitarian designs behind it – to withhold judgment, and to try and
understand what the digital ecosystem of governance might actually look
like. It has been, as Ashish Rajadhyaksha’s essay shows, an unfolding
story, especially in the startlingly *déjà vu* manner in which the new
Arogya Setu app evoked, in 2020, much of the voluntary/mandatory shadow
dance that we had seen in the old Aadhaar playbook. As the last decade
panned out, especially in the series of Supreme Court judgments between
2016 and 2018, it appeared that a new story could be told of the earlier
period when, coinciding with the arrival of social media, a new
apparatus of state regulation was also being assembled.

Such a retrospective retelling, Rajadhyaksha suggests, would now place
the National Population Register (NPR) as a far more central player in
the story of the first two decades of the present century than we
recognized when it was passed into law in 2010, to create a register of
India’s ‘usual residents’, redefining both the Citizenship Act, 1955 and
the Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity
Cards) Rules, 2003. In 2010, it had appeared that Aadhaar, which had
repeatedly claimed *not* to be mandatory and *not* about citizens but
rather about residents, and had presented itself in far more social
media-friendly terms than the NPR, had been in some conflict with the
coercive approach of the NPR, which had made registration mandatory for
all those who had either lived or intended to live in in India for six
months or more. A retrospective timeline – especially outlined in detail
by the 2018 Supreme Court judgment on Aadhaar – however suggests that
the two were very much envisaged together and were indeed always meant
to be two halves of a single picture.

Although this picture came together in public imagination only in 2019
with the passing of the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 and in the
protests that followed, what it did mean was that, even as
information-starved Indians everywhere were both consuming and producing
digital content, we were also being possessed by a larger ecosystem that
governed us. Such a state, and its attendant crisis, has been often most
directly evidenced in anxiety around access: both the *granting* of
access and concerns about the *control and regulation* of practices that
emerge.

In 2018, the Supreme Court judgment defined the condition of being
possessed by data in yet another way: by calling it ‘civil death’.[^05MainIntroduction_14]
It described what was happening as a ‘compulsory bartering away’ of
‘rights freely exercised, liberties freely enjoyed, entitlements granted
by the Constitution and laws’. All these rights, liberties, and laws
were being ‘made conditional’, and citizens were being compelled, in
return, to give up their biometrics ‘voluntarily’, allow their
biometrics and demographic information to be stored by the state and
private operators, and then used for a process termed ‘authentication’.

Such an operation has, said the Court, the ‘*propensity to cause the
civil death of an individual by simply switching of Aadhaar of that
person*’. If the Indian Constitution ‘balances rights of individuals
against State interest’, Aadhaar ‘completely upsets this balance and
skews the relationship between the citizen and the State enabling the
State to totally dominate the individual’.

Civil death, in this sense, may well be the extreme condition of such
possession – where data is viewed as something of a life-support
apparatus. More commonly, however, it redefines citizenship into a
condition of suspended animation of what Hasan calls ‘slow violence’. In
his detailed example of the digitization of landownership records, he
describes it as the routine ‘violence of data repair’ when actual people
find themselves trapped in a legally precarious condition of ‘temporal
vacuity, a state of limbo, a temporary break from ongoing relationships’
which, while not an extraordinary event of ‘spectacular violence’, is
nevertheless an equally deadly ‘circuitous low-grade suffering’.

## Accidental Possession and Verifiability 

In July 2020, Delhi University’s much-respected professor of English,
Hany Babu, was arrested by the National Investigation Agency, yet
another target in the state crackdown on intellectuals, academics, and
activists on the Left. As part of their inquiry, the Agency seized
Babu’s computer, and their ‘forensic inquiry’ claimed, in what had
become a by-now familiar police playbook, that some sort of a ‘disk
partition’ had existed in that machine between February and April 2019,
and that this partition had contained 62 files with ‘‘incriminating
details’ about his involvement in the Maoist movement’.[^05MainIntroduction_15] Hany Babu
said he had made no such partition, possessed no such files.

Eight months later, five senior academics – including several of Hany
Babu’s colleagues – went yet again to the Supreme Court with what
appeared to be a far more basic anxiety than even the protection of
their liberty: namely the potential loss of their research through
unauthorized seizure of their computers and hard disks. Such seizure,
they said, endangered decades of research work for their computers
contained ‘their life’s work’, ‘extensive field work spanning decades or
the results of scientific experiments or calculations’, ‘patentable
material \[…\] or work that runs the risk of being plagiarised’. All
such research work was ‘irreplaceable’. In the hands of the police, it
could ‘run the risk of damage, loss, destruction’ or – the academic’s
ultimate nightmare – ‘even distortion’.[^05MainIntroduction_16]

The question of what data is may in these fraught times open up,
together with an ontology, a parallel epistemic trajectory. Documents,
as Lisa Gitelman says in the beginning of her book *Paper Knowledge*,
are at base ‘epistemic objects’, ‘recognizable sites and subjects of
interpretation across the disciplines and beyond’ and are thus
‘evidential structures’ – essentially there to document, to *know* and
to *show* (along with their corollary, ‘no show’, or no proof).[^05MainIntroduction_17]
While their digital variants may inherit some of these properties, these
successor objects reveal a deeply disquieting elusiveness, where you (or
rather, your device) could have chance encounters with other data or
other human beings tampering with it, that can only be navigated in real
time.

Raw data, says a well-known book, is an ‘oxymoron’ for data is
everywhere, always already ‘cooked’.[^05MainIntroduction_18] ‘Access-centered discourse
overrides the complex terrain of the human-technology relationship –
usage, adoption, penetration, internalization, proliferation, nudging –
and becomes the single point of obsession in telling the promise of the
internet’, writes Shah. There is a double bind of anxiety, defining both
the concerns around privacy (and the draft Personal Data Protection Bill
of 2019) or the multiple Terms of Service and of Intermediary Liability
that define both informational control and access regulation. It is a
role that the state in its orthodox avatar is often unable to perform,
forcing new layers of ‘*state-like organizations* that would take up
state-like functions in order to help deal with the threat of access’.

Shah’s introduction of pornography into this picture, and his addition
to the famous Rule 34 of the internet that claims that ‘If something
exists, there is \[internet\] porn of it’, with a further Rule 35 that
‘If there is porn on the net, people will access it’, also brings a new
political edge to transgressive access which he understands as a
question of agency within the logics of regulation. In January 2018,
when a news report appeared that a journalist had been able, via a
WhatsApp group and an INR 500 bribe, to access the main databases of
Aadhaar, the journalist, instead of being recognized as a whistleblower,
was promptly charged with a criminal offence.[^05MainIntroduction_19] Among those who came
to her rescue at the time was Edward Snowden. He contended that Aadhaar
was ‘creating a systemisation of the public’ that was unrelated to its
original agenda.

The incident, alongside the tantalizing ease of the hack, also brought
to the fore the phenomenon of what we might call accidental possession.
This is *data contaminated*, not in its content, not even by how you
came across it, but most commonly in the way *it* accessed *you*.
The idea that there
exists only one single definable truth and any truth becomes a truth
only when it is *verifiable*, as this entire teleology of
truth-production got technologized (usually by interminable systems of
authentication), it also produced strange fruit that produced the very
opposite of their stated intentions when you found yourself caught
within the irresistibility of its flow.

There has been, for example, the growing phenomenon of *impunity*, or
what political theorist Anant Teltumbde calls the ‘macabre spectacle’ of
extreme violence conducted in the full glare of the media.[^05MainIntroduction_20] When
perpetrators of violence perform their actions in front of cameras,
leaving no one in doubt as to what happened, but nevertheless force a
legal challenge to the verification apparatus precisely from the excess
of data they have produced, they point to one of the basic consequences
of what Rajadhyaksha calls ‘creep’. If the entire history of state
digitization, from the Information Technology Act of 2000 through to
Aadhaar 2009 to the Citizenship Amendment Act of 2019, unveils a
relentless process of making ‘creep’ ubiquitous through the incessant
production of information overload, it necessarily also opens a
disquieting underside. Both the hacker’s pornographic transgressions and
its opposite, fears of police tampering, evoke the same crisis as do the
perpetrators of violence on camera – the possibility that data in its
very nature is always already contaminated, and that both the ‘truth’ it
stands for as well as the apparatus of its verifiability remain
compromised. What we see is, in a way, a new problem for democratic
governance, and it points to one of the more bizarre consequences of the
transition of the subject from a beneficiary of data practices into a
source for data harvesting.

## 

## The Body, the State

Much of this book deals with the apparatus of the digital state. As the
crisis of the informational subject reveals itself and reveals thereby
the unprecedented challenges to the Directive Principles of the
Constitution of India that define the responsibilities of the state, it
necessarily opens up a larger question on the ideologies of the state
apparatus itself – as distinct from the ruling ideologies of whichever
government happens to be in power. There was once the idealism of a
hierarchical, centralized, ordered state that regulated, along with its
data itself, a parallel meaning-making apparatus on what the data meant,
how it should be interpreted, who should be given access to it, and how
it could translate into policy. From the 80s, this idealism was replaced
with a second idealism of the neoliberal state, this time premised on
the seamless capacity of data to travel unhindered, to become both
universally accessible and universally intelligible. Such a belief,
which underpinned the protocols of networking and delivery of targeted
benefit, was in some measure adapted from the early idealism of the
internet, one that (we have suggested above) Justice Nariman’s judgment
of 2015 may well have brought to a close. We need, as we turn to a yet
more recent chapter in both idealisms, to not only question their
salience, but also to track – as Nafis Hasan does at the end of his
essay – a yet further development, where once again the state is seeking
to close down its borders to once more localize access: this time within
the boundaries of the nation.

Already, in 2019, and long before the pandemic saw national borders
being made tighter and more impregnable than perhaps ever in history,
both the morphing of the colonial Section 144 of the Indian Penal Code
(the right to public assembly) into the longest and most severe internet
shutdown the world has seen in Kashmir (over 500 days) – a blanket shut
off from data that threatened a ‘civil death’ type crisis of
unprecedented proportions – as well as the extreme Emergency-like
deployment, with the first COVID-19 outbreak, of the National Disaster
Management Act, 2005 in March 2020 revealed further state reinventions
through reinscribing real-life conditions into virtuality and back into
real life, and also the central presence of the embodied informational
subject in these makeovers. Overriding the question of how data
challenges the sovereignty of the nation-state, what we may be
witnessing is something opposite, namely the reinscription of data to
make something of a massive digital cartography project in the
re-encoding of the state. Its various *avatar*s,[^05MainIntroduction_21] from hierarchical
to networked to boundary-driven – and the corresponding *avatar*s of its
citizen, from resident (Aadhaar’s favored term) to ‘usual resident’ (as
used in the NPR) to beneficiary to ‘natural person’ and ‘data principal’
(as used in the Personal Data Protection Bill) – may well be best
comprehended as simulations of the models of democracy rather than
merely their digital renditions.

One result of this simulation process is the growing *weaponization* of
concepts like ‘sovereign national interest’ and ‘security and integrity
of India’ to define a new legal apparatus alongside the multiple new
identity and biotechnological checks that regulate national borders.
India’s legal system has, says legal theorist Gautam Bhatia, in recent
years taken a major turn.[^05MainIntroduction_22] Indian law has historically been
constituted by two parallel regimes, the criminal justice system (or
CJS) characterized by elements of due process, personal rights, and
rigorous judicial review of state power, and a parallel ‘preventive
detention system’ (PDS) in which none of these features obtain.

The two halves have been historically incompatible, but in recent years
this incompatibility has been solved by the simple if deadly expedient
of the return of the old colonial sedition law and its sequel laws,
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA),
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002, and now the Unlawful Activities
Prevention Act, 1967. All of these have been premised on custodial
detention, on absolute executive (as against judicial) supremacy. Almost
all are derived from unpredictable encounters with contaminated data.

Such weaponization of the apparatus of verifiability could be
intentional and targeted, as with digital benefit and surveillance, or
could emerge as a consequence of the sheer randomness of accidental
possession – where you did not discover data as much as it discovered
you, or when your inadvertent stumbling into a data ecosystem
automatically criminalized you. Identity here becomes a life-and-death
matter of dealing with essentially accidental encounters. If its extreme
condition is the threat to life itself – when a person’s digital
identity gets obliterated, hacked, or simply shut off – mostly it is a
slow-burning process of coming to terms with both the aspirational as
well as targeted consequences of overload, to learn overnight when to be
visible and when it is best not to be.

The focus on the embodied data-subject is thus no longer merely the
bearer of data but an instantiation of the data practices into which the
body finds itself immersed, voluntarily or otherwise. The weaponization
of data as evidence to punish, control, and contain the body is
therefore a corollary of digital misinformation and civil death. Both
conditions are eventually tied to the idea of ownership defined not in
terms of possession but of *distribution*. If data evidences are no
longer about discrete bodies and institutions where ownership can be
demonstrated, disrupted, or contained, then we could be looking at new
challenges posed by the conditions of data circulation to meaning
itself.

In the end, if Justice Nariman’s pronouncements on data may have ended
one kind of internet dream, his parallel point about making ‘no
distinction’ between ‘mere discussion or advocacy’ and ‘incitement by
which such words lead to an imminent causal connection with public
disorder’ may well open up another possibility.[^05MainIntroduction_23] The signification
of data through circulation exists within, but also breaches, the
boundaries of the state. In either case, it defines several of our
immediate political challenges, the subjective condition of being
immersed in informationality, or the consequences of being disconnected
from it.

[^05MainIntroduction_1]: Supreme Court of India, *Shreya Singhal* v *Union of India*, WP
    (Criminal) No. 167 of 2012 (24 March 2015),
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/110813550/.

[^05MainIntroduction_2]: The original 66A said that ‘any person who sends, by means of a
    computer resource or a communication device, (a) any information
    that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or (b) any
    information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of
    causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult,
    injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will,
    persistently by making use of such computer resource or a
    communication device, (c) any electronic mail or electronic mail
    message for the purpose of causing annoyance or inconvenience or to
    deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient about the origin of
    such messages, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
    which may extend to three years and with fine.

[^05MainIntroduction_3]: Pranesh Prakash, ‘Social Media Regulation vs. Suppression of Freedom of Speech’, *Kafila Online*, 19 November 2012,

    https://kafila.online/2012/11/19/social-media-regulation-vs-suppression-of-freedom-of-speech-pranesh-prakash/.

[^05MainIntroduction_4]: Pranesh Prakash,‘Adding Insult to
    Injury’, *Outlook India*, 19 November 2012,
    https://www.outlookindia.com/website/story/adding-insult-to-injury/283033.

[^05MainIntroduction_5]: *Shreya Singhal* v *UOI*.

[^05MainIntroduction_6]: Supreme Court of India, *S. Rangarajan Etc* v *P. Jagjivan Ram*,
    1989 SCR (2) 204, 1989 SCC (2) 574, 30 March 1989,
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/341773/.

[^05MainIntroduction_7]: *Shreya Singhal* v *UOI*.

[^05MainIntroduction_8]: Supreme Court of India, *Romila Thapar* v *Union of India*, Writ
    Petition (Criminal) No. 268 of 2018, 28 September, 2018,
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/52834611/. This concerned the arrest
    and incarceration without bail of several well-known activists,
    lawyers, and academics in 2018, known as the ‘Bhima-Koregaon’ case.
    On the occasion of the bicentenary celebrations of a colonial war
    celebrated by the Dalit community in Maharashtra, a political rally
    was held. It led to retaliatory violence, that in turn led to a
    major crackdown across the country. Most of the arrested are still
    in jail.

[^05MainIntroduction_9]: *Romila Thapar* v *UOI*.

[^05MainIntroduction_10]: Internet shutdown for 552 days, starting August 4, 2019, when
    Article 370 of the Constitution was abrogated by Parliament.

[^05MainIntroduction_11]: Partha Chatterjee, *I am the People: Reflections on Popular
    Sovereignty Today*, Ranikhet: Permanent Black, 2019, p 73.

[^05MainIntroduction_12]: See Ashish Rajadhyaksha, *The Last Cultural Mile: An Inquiry into
    Technology and Governance in India*, Bangalore: The Centre for
    Internet & Society/Researchers@Work, 2011; Rajadhyaksha (ed.), *In
    the Wake of Aadhaar: The Digital Ecosystem of Governance in India*,
    Bangalore: Centre for the Study of Culture and Society, 2013; Atig
    Ghosh (ed.), *Branding the Migrant: Arguments of Rights, Welfare and
    Security***,** Kolkata**:** Frontpage Publications Ltd., 2013.

[^05MainIntroduction_13]: The entire video archive is available on the open access platform
    pad.ma. See
    https://pad.ma/grid/title/list==zi:The\_Identity\_Project.

[^05MainIntroduction_14]: ‘Gist of the Challenge to the Aadhaar Scheme as Well as the Act’,
    Sec 59, Supreme Court of India, *Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (retd)* v
    *Union of India*, Writ Petition (C) 494/2012 (2018),
    https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2012/35071/35071\_2012\_Judgement\_26-Sep-2018.pdf.

[^05MainIntroduction_15]: Sukanya Shantha, ‘Elgar Parishad: NIA
    Arrests Hany Babu, 'Pressured Him to Implicate Colleagues, Others,’
    Says Wife’, *The Wire*, 28 July 2020,
    https://thewire.in/government/nia-bhima-koregaon-hany-babu-arrest-gn-saibaba.

[^05MainIntroduction_16]: Krishnadas Rajagopal, ‘Plea in Supreme Court to Save Academic
    Freedom’, *The Hindu*, 30 March 2021,
    https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/plea-in-supreme-court-to-save-academic-freedom/article34200750.ece.

[^05MainIntroduction_17]: Lisa Gitelman, *Paper Knowledge:
    Towards a Media History of Documents*, Durham: Duke University
    Press, 2014, pp 1–2.

[^05MainIntroduction_18]: Lisa Gitelman (ed.) *‘Raw Data’ is an
    Oxymoron*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2013.

[^05MainIntroduction_19]: ‘Journalists Exposing Aadhaar Deserve
    Award, Not Investigation: Edward Snowden’, The News Minute, 9
    January 2018,

    https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/journalists-exposing-aadhaar-deserve-award-not-investigation-edward-snowden-74409.

[^05MainIntroduction_20]: Anant Teltumbde, *The Persistence of
    Caste: The Khairlanji Murders and India's Hidden Apartheid*, London:
    Zed Books, 2010, pp. 54, 137.

[^05MainIntroduction_21]: Avatar, in this context, is a variant phase or version of a
    continuing basic entity.

[^05MainIntroduction_22]: Gautam Bhatia, *The Transformative
    Constitution: A Radical Biography in Nine Acts*, New Delhi: Harper
    Collins, 2019, p 257.

[^05MainIntroduction_23]: *Shreya Singhal* v *UOI*.
