---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# The Ambivalence of ‘Creep’: A Biopolitical History of Citizenship in Digital Times

### Ashish Rajadhyaksha 

## Introductory Note

This essay was written in April and June 2020,
during India’s first COVID-19 lockdown, and bears the marks of that
astonishing moment. The lockdown, as is well known, was announced on
March 24, 2000 under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 by the sudden
appearance of India’s prime minister on national television giving
four-hour notice before effectively shutting the country. All access to
the physical public domain was declared illegal and all travel
suspended, leaving millions of Indians not only in a space of
considerable legal jeopardy, as they could not prove their identity,
their address or their need to travel, but also in a physically
precarious space that threatened their very survival.

It did seem, that April and May, that several things had come to a head.
It also seemed that an unusual clarity had somehow descended upon us all
– not only a clarity about what was being attempted by the government,
but also where it was coming from. Eight months earlier, in August 2019,
similar restrictions on public movement had been enhanced by the longest
and most severe internet shutdown the world has seen, in the state of
Kashmir. And a scant four months earlier, nationwide protests had taken
place against the 2019 amendment to the Citizenship Act, 1955, whose
incendiary Section 2 (1)(b) was widely construed as directly targeting
Muslim migrants. The protests clubbed together
four disparate initiatives by the state: the Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2019 (CAA) together with a revised Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967 (UAPA) that could now designate individuals as terrorists, the
National Register of Citizenship (NRC), and the technology that was
believed to have been the one that enabled it all, India’s
much-discussed Aadhaar or biometric authentication system.

That April, as the jailed students (under
UAPA) of the Jamia Millia Islamia University came together with the
parallel images of millions upon millions of India’s displaced migrants
walking across the length of the subcontinent, or taking whatever means
of transport they could to escape the stranglehold of quarantine,
something appeared to click together. Even as images of the laborers
incessantly evoked the Partition of India, the last time such a scale of
subcontinental upheaval had taken place, it became clear that questions
of identity – and the regulatory mechanisms defining it – needed,
historically, conceptually, and politically, to take on a similar span.
You could not account for the Disaster
Management Act or the several technologies of ‘contact tracing’ it
brought in (most notably the Arogya Setu health app) without at the same
time looking at the history of legislation that went back to the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act), and to several other acts,
bills and rules redefining citizenship that went hand-in-hand with new
digital technologies ‘targeting’ India’s populace as recipients of state
benefit.

This essay retells what is to some a familiar story – or at least a
recent and well-known moment in history – from that particular, if
temporary, vantage point. There is wide acceptance that India, like
several other nation-states in different parts of the world, is seeing a
totalitarian turn in its governance. This is not new. India has
previously seen, in 1975, the formal suspension of civil rights, and has
also seen in several regions within the nation – from Kashmir to
Chhattisgarh and across the Northeast – military action under special
powers that looks a lot like the Emergency, with significant curbs on
public movement, the imposition of censorship, and the incarceration of
political dissidents.

What may well be new, however, was the
political weaponization of the massive digital infrastructure assembled
since the 90s. This infrastructure, which initially saw the famous
information technology revolution in the early 2000s, followed by the
targeted delivery of state benefit to consumers, beneficiaries, and
citizens (label depending on the nature of the benefit), also
undergirded a massive neoliberal state apparatus whose consequences may
only now be apparent.

For all its immediacy, the story may well go
back a long way. The fragmentation of ‘the people’ – the ‘we’ who wrote
the Constitution of India – into multiple rights and duties also
dispersed ‘the people’ into numerous new categories. These include,
among others, the ‘natural person’ and ‘digital principal’ of the draft
Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019, the ‘terrorist’ of the UAPA, and
the ‘hacker’ of the IT Act. Negotiating one’s digital existence includes
new questions basic to the idea of identity, ranging from bodily
incarceration and what one major Supreme Court judgment called ‘civil
death’ to an increasingly invisible ‘virtuality’.

This story is told
here in bold strokes, over five parts that foreground the conception of
‘creep’ or the phenomenon of how tools, devices, structures, or modes
develop a purpose far removed from their initial conception. The first
part, addressing the embodied sovereign subject, opens vexed questions
of citizenship going back to India’s Independence and beyond. The second
more specifically addresses Aadhaar, the promise and the revision,
suggesting a tactical maneuver – of two Aadhaars, one small and nimble,
the other a larger data guzzler acting at the behest of the state – and
an element of ‘creep’ literally built into the system. The third
addresses Justice D.Y. Chandrachud’s much-celebrated dissenting judgment
on the 2018 Aadhaar case in the Supreme Court, locating his view within
a tradition of social science addressing the question of identity in the
Indian subcontinent. The fourth looks at the basic transformation in the
conceptions of ‘people’ and ‘citizen’ as India moves into a new, many
argue, more draconian regime of digital management of civil society. The
fifth part primarily addresses the Kashmir internet shutdown and looks
at the link between freedom of speech and the right to free movement in
the public domain – a right directly threatened by the 2020 lockdown.

## 

## I

## 

## ‘The Time is not Right’: The Sovereign Body

## 

On April 10, 2020, three weeks into the first
COVID-19 lockdown, Safoora Zargar, an MPhil student at Delhi’s Jamia
Millia Islamia University, was arrested by Delhi Police. She was a
member of a student body that had been active in the agitations that had
convulsed the nation since early December 2019, ever since Parliament
passed the CAA.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_1] Now she was accused of organizing a protest at East
Delhi’s Jaffrabad metro station in support of a planned nationwide
strike.

The agitations over December and January had been generally peaceful,
often led by women, their most visible manifestation the very public
occupation of Shaheen Bagh in deep eastern Delhi.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_2] Although
right-wing pro-Hindutva hotheads had repeatedly threatened retaliation,
nobody was quite prepared for what now followed Jaffrabad or what
Zargar’s protest would be accused of having started.

A day after the Jaffrabad metro sit-in, a man named Kapil Mishra, member
of the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), proclaimed that the
protesters in Delhi had three days to wind up their movement, a period
of grace determined by American President Donald Trump’s visit to India
at the time. That grace period never materialized: violence broke out
that very night and over the next five days, even as Trump was being
feted by the president of India, 53 people were killed and thousands
lost their homes, many forever.

It is widely accepted that Delhi police did nothing to stop these riots.
On February 26, 2020, the Delhi High Court heard an emergency plea to
urgently step in and ensure both accountability and immediate police
action. A two-judge bench chastised the police for their failure in
bringing to book the pro-BJP leadership whose inflammatory speeches as
well as active role in the riots had been widely recorded. That night,
the bench was replaced and one of the justices, S. Muralidhar,
transferred. The following day, another bench accepted with alacrity the
solicitor general’s claim that the abnormality of the situation, with
passions inflamed everywhere, made it not ‘conducive’ for any action
against the riot instigators. The authorities were given six weeks to
comfortably rethink their strategy.

Even as tensions remained high and thousands of people who had lost
their homes continued to seek temporary shelter and basic help, the
COVID-19 pandemic came upon us. In late March, a nationwide lockdown was
declared, initially for three weeks but extended four times thereafter,
leaving millions of migrant laborers stranded in conditions of extreme
hunger and penury. This lockdown was
authorized by an unusual emergency measure: a time-bound Order issued on
March 24, 2020 invoking the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The Ministry
of Home Affairs decided that it was ‘satisfied that the country is
threatened’ and that ‘effective measures’ were needed.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_3] Every
extension thereafter became an excuse to add ever-greater authority to
the home ministry. ‘It can be tempting in these circumstances to argue
that the executive’s powers are limitless’, warned legal theorist Gautam
Bhatia, ‘that, if the government so chooses, fundamental rights can be
suspended at will. The pandemic \[…\] is an existential threat and the
paramount need to save lives takes precedence over all other interests.’
However, ‘any temporary measures they impose have a disturbing habit of
entrenching themselves into the landscape \[…\] well after the crisis
has passed.’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_4]

Zargar, meanwhile, was taken to Tihar Jail and charged with non-bailable
offences under the draconian UAPA. This Act itself has seen significant
modifications since it was first introduced in 1967 mainly as an
anti-terrorist measure. In 1967, it had mainly targeted organizations,
or ‘unlawful associations’, usually either Maoist or Muslim, trying to
‘bring about \[…\] the secession of a part of the territory of India
from the Union, or \[…\] disrupt the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of India’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_5] A major shift, of
some relevance to the argument that now follows, was the 2004 amendment
that began recognizing ‘persons’ as also potential terrorists, making it
possible to give such organizations an identifiable name and a face,
thereby also making the UAPA the instrument of choice for suppressing
political dissent.

This was the Act under which Zargar was arrested, followed by arrests
the next day of human rights activists Gautam Navlakha and Anand
Teltumbde for their involvement in the aftermath of the Bhima-Koregaon
crackdown in 2018.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_6] In a public letter he wrote shortly before
surrendering, Navlakha pointed to how the amendments to the UAPA had
advocated ‘stringent punishment’ without any checks and balances, such
as ‘stricter procedures regarding evidence, especially electronic’. As
‘\[legal\] procedures, which otherwise provide tighter rules regarding
evidence’ become ‘elastic’, jail ‘becomes the norm, and bail an
exception \[…\] \[the\] process itself becomes punishment’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_7]

When Zargar and her fellow students were taken to Tihar, their phones
were taken away, their passwords extracted under duress, and when they
expressed apprehension that fake evidence may be planted, the magistrate
at the Patiala House Court refused to monitor the cases for once again,
as the Delhi High Court too had said, the ‘time was not right’. This
time the reason was the ‘circumstances ensuing in the nation due to
pandemic’ that made it ‘not feasible to call for weekly reports and to
monitor them’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_8] Zargar, who was several
months pregnant when she was arrested, had been at the time of writing
placed in solitary confinement, in her own interest according to the
police, who officially renamed it as quarantine.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_9]

Ten days after her arrest, Delhi Police, clearly on the defensive,
asserted on Twitter that they had done their job ‘sincerely and
impartially’ and would not be ‘deterred by the false propaganda and
rumors floated by some vested elements’. The arrests, they said, had
been made ‘based on analysis of scientific and forensic evidence,
including video footages, technical & other footprints’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_10]

\*\*\*

This essay does not deal with the specific legal situation that Safoora
Zargar and her colleagues face. Nor does it deal with the condition of
migrant labor during the pandemic, trapped as they were in a major
crisis of identity, somewhere between work and home. I shall attempt
instead to address what seems to be a techno-normative maneuver that
brings together several of the key issues in which both the arrested
students and the stranded laborers find themselves implicated.
The National Population Register or NPR, the
‘video footages, technical & other footprints’ that the police claim to
have as the basis for Zargar’s arrest, the modified UAPA, and the
astonishing Emergency powers that the pandemic vested in the hands of
the state at the time of writing all come together to allow the
authorities to say that both Zargar and the migrant laborers were
quarantined, jailed or stranded *in their own best interests*. The
authorities were to decide as much ‘with sincerity’ as from the arsenal
of scientific and forensic evidence they claim to possess what that
interest should be.

I suggest that we are seeing something of a state-created technological
unilateralism that fundamentally reinterprets the concepts of both
sovereignty and citizenship. At the time of writing, India’s state
apparatus, as though a *parens patriae* gone rogue, had started
deploying digital technology to create a combination of legal,
administrative, and technological conditions for arrogating for itself
the absolute, imperial right to *own the people*.

Such an absolute right, although most graphically represented by
carceral control of subjects, springs primarily from the data that the
state now possesses on those subjects. As data (together with the sole
right to interpret it) becomes state property, so does its unique
authority to define the social good get weaponized. A populist
abstraction of the ‘people’ has increasingly been turned against actual
people, who no longer have any say in what is being done in their name
and apparently for their own good. Citizens as conscious and autonomous
subjects, capable of comprehending the responsibilities that go with key
constitutional rights, are replaced by populations to be ‘managed’ and
symbolized by individuated bodies, identifiable and incarcerable.

India has had a historical ambivalence around citizenship. The modern
citizen-subject, a thinking person who could qualify for a unique
individuated subjectivity, has historically been separated from another
kind of undifferentiated subject, literally a *body to be enumerated*,
to be fed, housed, incarcerated, quarantined. As a result, citizenship
has a component part that is viewed as an entitlement, requiring
qualifiers, impossible to make available for all. Niraja Gopal Jayal, in a complex argument which will appear many
times in this essay, identifies a differentiated citizenship, of status
(or ‘thin’ citizenship) as against practice (‘thick’ citizenship).[^06AshishRajadhayksha_11]
Within reform language, the first is meant to lead to the second in the
assumption that, in the fullness of time, status would eventually
translate into practice. Both race and class defined many of its
subjective qualifications when India became independent, even though the
Constitution of India explicitly defined *residence* (or *jus soli*) as
the overriding qualification for citizenship. Over decades, however,
residence has been replaced by *jus sanguinis* (blood-based descent),
specifically so in the 2004 amendments to the Citizenship Act,
1955.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_12]

At the same time, there has remained the enduring recognition of people
who are either not, not-yet, or not-quite citizens, who nevertheless
have to receive basic welfare, even if not necessarily any other
entitlements. Colonial India – in which an articulate nationalist elite
campaigned for the citizenship rights of subaltern Indians in the
British Dominions even as they ‘accepted without question their own
privileged class position within India’ – saw a definitional shift take
place, early on, in the concept away from civil and political rights to
social and economic rights, says Jayal.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_13] It also led to an
especially troubled career for what Jayal calls social citizenship.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_14]
A universal and ‘difference-blind’ citizenship was replaced by a
group-differentiated constitutional identification of various special
‘backward’ categories, primarily of caste but also gender and other
social categories. While such a recognition of backwardness went far
toward acknowledging diverse forms of historical discrimination, the
flip side has been that delivery of *economic* benefit did not
necessarily extend to *social* rights.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_15] Indeed, special care was
taken to ensure that this did not happen. It was necessary that the
right to food and shelter, to education and to vote, should not
automatically translate into the associational privileges of
citizenship. ‘To become a citizen required being marked, but
paradoxically the very act of getting marked meant the entrenchment of
one’s exclusion from substantive citizenship’, says Jayal.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_16] Politics
would thus produce some of its most elaborate contours in India as a
fight for social justice.

\*\*\*

Digital platforms arrived in the 2000s with the intention of delivering
state welfare with a utopian promise. They were to accurately identify
intended recipients and make sure those recipients got their benefits in
a direct and unmediated mode. ‘Leakages’, it was claimed, both of
misdirected benefit and corrupt middlemen, would be eliminated.

The experience has been rather different, even as digital governance
enhanced the Indian state’s enumerative capability to historically
inconceivable levels. As populations turned into targeted beneficiaries
identified by whatever category of ‘backwardness’ or lack of that
qualified them for benefit, many entered the digital gateway on terms
that would freeze their status on the poverty line, their qualification
for property, and their creditworthiness. Somewhere along the way, a
divide between entitlement and welfare also got frozen. The potential
redrawing of the blurry and porous character of the ‘last mile problem’
often enhanced social divides as it recast them into a new form of
socio-technological rigidity. New questions of source codes and
encryption arose even as a new battle over coercion and aspiration came
to define, since 2000, the primary location for social rights in India.

Divides between aspirational rather than
received identity would sharpen after 2004 when the arrival of social
media – whose associational rights as defined by Apple and Facebook
appeared to be beyond the control of and perhaps were even antagonistic
to the enumerative apparatus of the state – represented far friendlier
digital possibilities for much of the same demographic that digital
governance was also fashioning as its target. A technological battle for
control now ensued in India, between coercive measures to regulate what
came to be known in the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2018 as ‘data
fiduciaries’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_17] and conciliatory ones such as Aadhaar’s various
attempts to dress itself as cool and media friendly.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_18] Various social
media platforms struggled to make their peace with the IT Act’s many
amendments, Facebook going the furthest in proposing nothing less than
the abolition of net neutrality, the holy grail of internet freedom, in
return for partnership with the Indian state.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_19]

There was a larger history at play here when a week into the first
pandemic lockdown the central government announced the launch of a smart
phone app named Aarogya Setu or ‘Health Bridge’ as a single-point
solution for contact tracing, believed to be an essential part of
fighting the pandemic. Would *health* now be added to multiple existing
criteria for social exclusion? At the time of writing, the app revealed
four parts to its operating system. The first recorded some basic
demographics: name, age, gender, and travel history. The second, a kind
of automated health check, gave a diagnosis for any symptoms you wished
to list out: temperature, oxygen saturation levels, and so on. The third
gave periodic updates on the pandemic. The fourth, in all probability
intended to be the key section for future use, was a digital ‘e-pass’
that worked like a kind of health data aggregator to certify that you
are ‘green’ and thus healthy enough to access public utilities. The
e-pass, clearly templated on China’s Alipay Health Code,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_20] was
designed to continuously record your geographic location, while your
Bluetooth (which is required to be permanently open) range recorded all
other Aarogya Setu apps that might come within 6 feet of you, thus
enabling contact tracing if anybody in your chain of access ever tests
positive, while recording your whereabouts in relation to designated
containment zones. Everybody who installs this app gets a static digital
ID; so far it appears that some 90 million have done so.

As it has rolled out, Aarogya Setu’s safeguards have been stressed by
Rahul Matthan, a lawyer representing the Government of India on matters
of technology and privacy law and tasked with putting together the legal
framework for the app. The data would, he
asserted, remain inside your phone; it would be extracted only if you
came into actual contact with anyone who tested positive for Covid-19,
unless, that is, it was needed for research or other such use.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_21] Your
digital ID, tagged onto your name and your data, would be anonymized
unless you came under any threat of exposure. This data would be deleted
from your phone every 30 days and, if at all it was pulled into any
cloud, would be deleted from there within 45 or 60 days. The bottom line
was that the app only existed for the limited purpose of fighting the
pandemic. Most importantly, said Matthan, its implementation was
voluntary. If you didn’t want it, you didn’t
have to have it; even if you did have it, you could switch off the
Bluetooth and the GPS anytime or simply uninstall the app.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_22]

Many of these claims
have unraveled, some quite spectacularly. On April 12, 2020, a
middle-aged woman sitting down to dinner with her husband and daughter
in an apartment in the Mumbai suburb of Kalina suddenly encountered the
proverbial knock on the door: a team of officials of the Brihanmumbai
Municipal Corporation (BMC), two policemen, and an ambulance outside,
responding to a ‘complaint from the PMO office’ that she had tested
positive for COVID-19.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_23] The woman protested and her neighbors
confirmed that she hadn’t gone anywhere, that she had rigorously
observed the lockdown, that no stranger could have possibly come within
6 feet of her. Her protestations came to nought and she was taken away
to be hospitalized and tested. She had apparently installed the Aarogya
Setu app earlier that day, leaving many to puzzle out just where the bug
lay, and not least why she had been treated like a criminal.
Two days later, when a pizza delivery boy in
Delhi working for the food delivery service Zomato tested positive,
Zomato and several other local delivery services began using ‘Arogya
Setu compliance certificates’ issued by a commercial entity named
‘Suraksha Store’, in partnership with the Department of Consumer
Affairs, for a fee and in return for a host of further data.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_24] While
initially termed voluntary, no effort was being made any longer to even
pretend that the app installation was voluntary.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_25] The Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions issued an office memorandum
that ‘all officers, staff (including outsourced staff) working in
Central Government should download ‘Aarogyasetu’ app on their mobile
phones, immediately’. All these employees, ‘before starting for office’
should ‘review their status on Aarogyasetu and commute only when the app
shows ‘safe’ and ‘low risk’ status’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_26] On April 29, 2020, an Order
extending the lockdown under the Disaster Management Act required
private corporations to ensure their employees had the app as a
condition for reopening. In 2020, reports were coming in that the app
might be required to be compulsorily preinstalled on all new
smartphones, and may well be uninstallable.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_27]

By late May 2020, all of the above was still
happening under the Disaster Management Act, 2005. There was no clarity
on when and if the technology would be pulled down, what kind of
dedicated legislation would be put in place to run this in the longer
term, especially once the Act was withdrawn, how such legislation would
handle any conflicts with the Personal Data Protection Bill or who would
oversee its use. Meanwhile the ‘e-pass’, the fourth and possibly
deadliest part of Arogya Setu’s OS, was recommended as a travel
requirement on all journeys by land or air and on the Delhi Metro
whenever these services reopened.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_28]

Much of this is because the likely true uses of the Aarogya Setu app,
like of all digital governance, are an evolving story, and if precedent
is anything to go by, the story will be one of creep. Already, on April
10, 2020, a wing of the Information & Broadcasting Ministry put out a
tender for a ‘Covid-19 Patient Tracking Tool’ along with a handheld
thermal imager and an optical fever-sensing system. The tracking tool,
probably something like a wristband, was meant to ‘pair with Arogya
Setu’ to identify what it now quite unambiguously names a ‘suspect’, to
‘identify a suspects behaviour, see what he or she does on specific days
of the week, where does he or she order food from, where does the
suspect go for regular walks, where does he/she work during the day,
where does he/she sleep at night’; identify ‘close contacts, frequent
contacts as well as occasional contacts’; ‘trace where this person has
been’; ‘collect information like where the suspect has spent most of
his/her time and who all he or she has met’; and ‘identify common
friends’. Basically, the tracking tool was meant to be an ‘intelligence
investigation platform & tactical tool to detect, prevent and
investigate threats to national security using CDR, IPDR, Tower, Mobile
Phone Forensics Data.’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_29]

This is unambiguously surveillance language. The tool’s purposes as a
kind of health surveillance mechanism are independent of its founding
intentions. Aarogya Setu’s contact-tracing capability, at this moment
its primary reason to exist, has been questioned by many, for example,
by Professor Subhashis Banerjee of the Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi in a remarkable presentation for the Internet Freedom
Foundation.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_30] The scientific-technical
questions about whether the tool works or not need not detain this
argument since all it takes is to shift focus and figure out a
different, and perhaps infinitely more effective potential purpose for
this mechanism.

A day after the app was announced, on April 3, 2020, a memo from the
Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhavan, noted that ‘technology experts,
academicians and private companies’ had offered a wide range of
‘technology products and applications’ with which to fight this
pandemic. The memo announced the decision ‘to create an enabling
mechanism through a public-private partnership model to develop and
implement a ‘Citizen App technology platform, on-boarding all citizens
in combating Covid-19’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_31]

You only need to call it what this Cabinet Secretariat memo calls it,
namely a *Citizen* App, and other possibilities emerge. They also take
us back to where the story originally began for Safoora Zargar: back to
the National Population Register and the original reason for the Shaheen
Bagh protests.

## The Body Corporeal: Revisiting an Old Project

The argument I present below is a revisionist account of the past two
decades. It seeks to produce a hindsight account of a transformation in
the embodied national subject, enabled by the *technological
appropriation* of what I’m calling an ‘ambivalence’ that is inherent to
the concept of citizenship in India.

The ambivalence has been, in brief, this. As thin and thick citizenship
straddles two increasingly separate spheres – in shorthand, those of
*entitlement* and *right* – it has also allowed a further ambivalence,
as actual human beings, concretized into various manifestations, become
discrete subsets of the abstracted ‘people’. Such ambivalence opens a
two-level operation of citizenship, an increasingly segregationist
approach when the constitutional privileges of citizenship get
selectively and diversely distributed to actual people. While normative
segregation is historically part of what Sudipta Kaviraj (quoted later
in this essay) famously called the ‘enumerated’ community, what may not
have been adequately discussed is the ways by which it has been further
enabled by digital technology in terms of controls over data gathering,
aggregation, and analytics, but also in terms of *whose* data was being
gathered and the rights of both access and control it promises to that
person in the process of converting her into a data subject.

Just a little over a decade ago, my coauthors in this volume, Nishant
Shah and Nafis Hasan, the lawyer Sruti Chaganti and I led a large team
on a major project to research the grassroots social impact of the
Aadhaar project, or the ‘Unique Identity for Every Indian Resident’,
that had been announced with much fanfare by the Government of India in
February 2009. This paper is not about those findings, but it
nevertheless emerges from that experience to make a larger argument set
in April 2020, the time of writing this essay, even as we see Aarogya
Setu reprise the old Aadhaar playbook in startling detail. My
revisionist account then, the one I provide here, was not available to
us in the period 2009–2011, even though a hindsight reading of several
of the findings of the Identity Project do provide initial signs of how
things might pan out in the decade that followed.

In February 2009, when the Unique Identification Number (UID) (as we
still called it then, the term ‘Aadhaar’ was yet to enter common usage)
was announced, there were admittedly reasons to worry. But there was
also palpable excitement. The IT revolution still retained the last
gasps of its 90s fervor and much of its history was still being written.
Although many friends and colleagues perhaps
more in tune with the times than us brought up grisly specters of Big
Brother, we decided we weren’t going to jump the gun, we wouldn’t
predetermine what would happen, for there were two, perhaps three,
essential reasons for why we believed this might yet be a political and
technology game changer. For one, it promised a technological flattening
of hierarchies that had been historically inbuilt into citizen-based
identity, and we felt this entire enterprise was very likely going to
have unpredictable consequences that we wanted to study in real time.
Secondly, it appeared, at least initially, that this flattening would
not happen from above, but rather in a way that did not delegitimize the
market – it would adopt market-consonant approaches to bridge what we
believed was the one ambivalence that needed the deepest possible study:
the proverbial ‘last mile’.

Thirdly, and most importantly, and shorn of all excess claim, we
understood the UID’s claims to be twofold. One, to issue a unique,
randomized, dumb number. Such a number would have no intelligence
attached to it and it would be issued to all Indian residents (as
against citizens, an important distinction).[^06AshishRajadhayksha_32] And, two, to assemble
an easy verification mechanism in which that demographic identifier
would connect to biometrics – to prove that I am who I say I am, even if
I have no other document to prove this. My identity would be my
scientific, culturally unmarked, body. My identity thus would lie solely
in my bodily existence. It would not be dependent on another’s
endorsement.

Such a biopolitical definition of the citizen would be autonomous from
the cultural credentials of citizenship – such as status, family,
education, or employment – to which numerous Indian residents had no
access. The demographic data would be name, date and place of birth,
gender, parents’ names and UID numbers (optional for adult residents)
and address (permanent and present). This data would, as the 2016 Aadhar
Bill later reasserted, explicitly exclude ‘race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, income or medical history
of an individual’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_33]

In 2008, Nandan Nilekani published *Imagining India: Ideas for the New
Century*, one of the more useful books in the ‘ten easy ways to reboot
India overnight’ genre obligatory for tech tycoons. Many also saw it as
a book-length job application for the post of head of the UID authority.
The following February, the Unique Identification Authority of India
(UIDAI) was set up and it published a working paper, *Creating a Unique
Identity for Every Resident in India*. Read together, Nilekani’s book
and the working paper have the synergy of a virtual manifesto of tech
solutionism – of what was wrong with the country, what needed doing,
where the hope lay, and what the UID would now do to realize that hope.

Among its founding principles, the UID was above all *not* going to
provide a citizenship record; it would be available to *anyone who*
*resided* *in this nation*. It was not – repeat *not*, repeat *ad
infinitum* not – an identity card. It would only be a ‘mechanism that
uniquely identifies a person, and ensures instant identity
verification’. Its purpose, once such a unique identification took
place, was to ‘transform the delivery of social welfare programs by
making them more inclusive of communities’ and also ‘enable the
government to shift from indirect to direct benefits, and help verify
whether the intended beneficiaries actually receive
funds/subsidies’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_34] It would thus eliminate ‘gatekeepers’ and link
‘investors, farmers and citizens directly to both information and
resources, and \[provide\] rapidly democratizing access’, since
‘unprecedented access to information and resources’ was the only thing
that would transform ‘both political and economic power
structures’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_35]

As Partha Chatterjee has argued in multiple contexts, independent India
had found ways to expand key developmental systems of welfare beyond its
normative citizens by creating parallel forms of classification and
enumeration that divided society into elementary units of
*population.*[^06AshishRajadhayksha_36] Unlike the citizen, he said, a population is
descriptive and empirical, not normative. In 2009, it appeared at least
possible that such a concept of nonnormative identity could pitch the
bodily self as tagged identifier into a flatter, more equitable digital
ecosystem of both governance and social acceptance. That identification
had purposes other than merely those of surveillance. That, as a result,
the rose-tinted digital future just might if not fight then at least
bypass the hierarchies of social exclusion that analogue citizenship had
seemingly written in stone.

It all seemed to come down to a particular interpretation of what, to
use prevalent terminology, was widely known as the last mile problem.
Such a problem was typically referenced by the so-called Rajiv Gandhi
15-paise formula, namely that only 15 paise of every rupee meant for a
poor beneficiary actually reached that person. ‘Across our creaky
subsidy distribution systems’, writes Nilekani, ‘leakages average 50 per
cent and more. The inefficiency of these state schemes has gotten even
worse over the last two decades’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_37] Benefit does not reach
beneficiaries because of leakages either due to theft or corruption.
This is tolerated in India mainly because, said Nilekani, the benefit
was seen as *subsidy* (i.e. an entitlement) and not *benefit*.

The last mile problem was not new to the Indian political system, but
what was perhaps new was its translation into a communication paradigm.
In its classical form, the ‘last mile’ is a communications term defining
the final stage of providing connectivity from a communications provider
to a recipient.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_38] The last mile *problem* referred to situations in
which intended beneficiaries do not receive the communicated signal due
to either a break or distortion in the system at the receiver’s end. The
term has been widened to include problems that affect schemes of public
policy, from disaster relief to housing and food subsidies, where
benefits go astray and do not percolate to those for whom they are
intended. The UID would now, declared its book-working-paper manifesto,
eliminate this problem once and for all. It now promised both accurate
identification of and targeted delivery to intended recipients.

New questions arose in our project and new
data needed to be studied. What of flaws, not in the methodology but in
the very theory of ‘targeting’? When creating new group-differentiated
(as against universal) definitions of public distribution to recognize
special ‘backward’ categories deserving of special benefit, would the
shortcuts to which Chatterjee points – the workarounds of normative
protocols – not create potentially more problems than they solved? Could
the mere redefinition of politics and democracy into a communications
model be a sufficient solution for the shadowy, secondarized, and often
covert domain of negotiated state operation that now arose? Was it not
inevitable that techno-managerial solutions would paper over what might
become foundational cracks between the theory and practice of democracy?

What happens, Amartya Sen famously asks, when large forms of public good
are not divisible into targeted individual use?[^06AshishRajadhayksha_39] Does not delivery
of something like ‘shirts and apples’ always trump the delivery of, say,
a ‘malaria-free environment’? What happens then when, as the marketplace
enters this targeting mechanism, individuated developmental goals start
getting available only for a fee? What happens
when uncomfortable tracking mechanisms begin being built into the
delivery that reveal not the beneficiary’s need, but her ability to pay
for them?

The problem was further enhanced by another view. A slight shift in the
kaleidoscope showed the last mile being routinely bridged by diverse
local actors and low-end economies: rather like a boatman who plied you
across a river when the bridge had collapsed, or a tout who walked you
through an incomprehensible bureaucratic maze.

As a communication model the flaw could be somewhat precisely
identified. The model worked only when the receiver was seen to also be
a *sender* of a kind, and this sender could only become one if she was
given some agency. ‘The art of ‘targeting’’, says Sen, ‘is far less
simple than some advocates of means-testing tend to assume \[…\] since
the potential beneficiaries are also *agents of action*’ (emphasis
mine).[^06AshishRajadhayksha_40] Such agency of action was possible only if assignation of
identity went along with the capacity to *talk back* – to act on
juridical citizenship rights, such as being able to vote or litigate –
and it worked even better when peer-to-peer structures enabled
recipient-senders on the periphery to communicate without having to go
through any apparatus of centralized gatekeeping.

How, in delivering state benefit using
communications language, does one view the recipient as also a sender? A
sender of what? Who is qualified to receive what the senders were
sending? How might senders exercise some control over the data being
generated in their name, and ostensibly with their knowledge? How to
enable two-way and peer-to-peer structures? Back in the late 60s, the
scientist Vikram Sarabhai had proposed terrestrial television as a
single-point solution to what he said were the two key problems of last
mile delivery in India: *linguistic diversity* and *geographical
distance*.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_41] Considered the classic example of India’s fascination
with technological leapfrogging, or the use of the latest available
technology to jump intermediate steps within the developmental curve to
‘catch up’ with the developed world,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_42] the Sarabhai model would
inaugurate a developmental fascination with communications media in its
innate capacity to link *connectivity* to the key tenets of democratic
citizenship. This paradigm, first deployed with radio, has provided the
major rationale for successive technological developments: the wave of
portable transistors in the 60s, the terrestrial transponders of the
first televisual revolution in the early 80s, the capacity of satellite
since the SITE and INSAT series, and the arrival of wired networks
(LANs, cable, fiber optics) followed by wireless technology (WLAN,
WiMAX, W-CDMA) from the 90s, all of which seemed to have battled this
two-way and peer-to-peer problem and found many provisional solutions
one way or another.

Nilekani’s use of the term ‘electronification’ appeared to consciously
evoke this history – he himself has welcomed a popular science
historiography casting him in the tradition of Visveswaraiah and
Sarabhai[^06AshishRajadhayksha_43] – and his upbeat assumption that ‘entrepreneurial energy’
would ‘work its way through infrastructure barriers and connect markets,
thus building innovative, interlinked networks from scratch’,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_44]
appeared at least worth hearing out for its possibility of defining
bodily identity in a way that did not entirely rip it from its survival
conditions.

It is perhaps worth
remembering that the arrival of a new ecosystem – combining mobile
networks, satellite communications, offline enrolment and verification –
did offer promise. There were the inevitable glitches, but it appeared,
at least initially, that the UID, for the first time, was bringing to
the table a mix of agencies to improve direct benefit service delivery
and direct cash transfers to poor beneficiaries.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_45] How effectively it
would do this was yet to be seen, but the proposition was at least
before us.

Despite this long history of development
communication, two-way and peer-to-peer structures have been
incommensurable with the hierarchical self-image of the Indian state.
One consequence, as a bureaucrat pointed out during our Identity Project
interviews, was that ‘everywhere the state usually steps in when markets
fail; in India, markets step in when the state fails’. Access to various kinds of community-market mechanisms that were
often hidden, rendered covert and even illegal (the criminalization of
bribery, for example) appeared through our field studies a far more
trusted lifeline to survival for much of the population than often
discredited state benefit, not least because, even at the time, all such
state benefit came inevitably with the threat of surveillance, even in,
and perhaps especially during, times of crisis. Again, to quote Amartya
Sen, the role that markets play ‘depend\[s\] \[…\] not only on what they
can do but also on what they are allowed to do’. While the interests of
some people are served by the smooth functioning of markets, there are
‘groups whose established interests may be hurt by such functioning’.
Confronting such influences has to occur ‘not merely through resisting –
and perhaps even ‘exposing’ – the seekers of profit from captive
markets, but also \[…\] taking on their intellectual arguments *as
proper subjects of scrutiny*’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_46]

## Little Aadhaar, Big Aadhaar – ‘The Poisoned Well’ and the Origins of Creep

The idealism with regard to Aadhaar as a revolutionary technology didn’t
last long. Perhaps, barring our project, the optimism over Aadhaar was
never really recorded, and so it is worth noting, momentarily, the
excitement of the brief period when the UID (not yet Aadhaar) presented
itself as at least potentially a radical break from unidirectional
hyper-centralization. Nilekani’s contention, in *Imagining India*, that
information technology, ‘untouched as it were by the legacies of the
*sarkar raj*, could be a powerful leverage for better public services
\[…\] could play a bigger and more powerful role in the economy than
anyone had guessed or attempted before’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_47] was part of the giddy
romance of the internet. It was also the moment from where the story
would begin to unravel.

Early warnings were less to do with the enrolment procedure itself and
more about the UID being a populist mechanism upon which central and
state governments were mounting their own diverse schemes with diverse
ideological purposes. Many revealed a gargantuan KYR-plus desire for
gathering ever-expanding and infinitely more intrusive data about all
those it enrolled, well beyond what Aadhaar itself asked.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_48] We were,
it appeared at times, seeing an optical double image: of two Aadhaars, a
lithe lean-and-mean Aadhaar, up front and visible, and a massively
data-guzzling Big Aadhaar lurking in the shadows. This ghost-image
effect would be key to the creep that now followed.

The UID itself was no more than one, albeit crucial, cog in a very large
wheel that was the National E-Governance Plan (NeGP) announced in 2006
by the then-Department of Electronics and Information Technology to
promote e-governance through a series of mission mode projects to
deliver various services online.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_49] As the only cog that sought to define
the wheel itself, the UID now became something of an in-house ideologue
for Digital India as a whole (and so gradually became indistinguishable
from it), taking it upon itself to explain how all manner of programs
would work, from health care to microfinance, to mediate their populist
differences, all the while ‘pitching’ the usefulness of its key central
feature – direct cash transfers under the overall umbrella concept of
financial inclusion. *Interoperability*, and Aadhaar’s unique ability to
offer it, was going to be the key to the success of the NeGP. Inevitably
this proved complex, not least because of turf wars, but more
significantly because of seeming ideological differences between
different populisms to which Aadhaar’s own delivery mechanism claimed,
increasingly ineffectually, to be neutral.

Was it, to take only one contradiction, mandatory or was it not? Aadhaar
itself repeatedly asserted (as Aarogya Setu is currently doing) that it
was not, but that meant little when government schemes that *were*
mandatory mounted an ‘interoperable’ arrangement upon it: it rapidly
became, as Jean Drèze would say, ‘like selling bottled water in a
village after poisoning the well, and claiming that people are buying
water voluntarily’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_50] Drèze was one of the early critics of the
program, fearing the damage it would cause to the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), especially its insistence on being the
sole payments gateway for cash transfers. Drèze and Reetika Khera spoke
of a ‘potent recipe for chaos’ if workers of the Mahatma Gandhi Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) were deprived of their bank
passbooks, inserted into a system where there was no internet
connectivity, and required single bank operating procedures.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_51] Drèze
also noted with some apprehension a proposal in 2010 by the Planning
Commission that the National Food Security Act should impose the
‘mandatory use of UID numbers which are expected to become operational
by the end of 2010’. ‘No UID’, says Drèze, ‘no food’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_52] So much then
for the UID’s much-touted voluntary nature.

While some differences between Aadhaar and the government schemes on
which it was mounted were foundational, like the vexed ‘mandatory’
question, other differences (mostly procedural issues) appeared like a
dispute internal to the joint family that was the NeGP, to be resolved
within. The real battle emerged when a hairy outsider moved into the
neighborhood scarcely a year after the UIDAI was set up, clearly with
hostile intent: the National Population Register or NPR.

Between 2010 and 2012, Aadhaar would fight a bitter, occasionally
personal, and clearly ideological battle with the NPR that saw its very
existence threatened more than once. Eventually it was – or so it
appeared at the time – the price Aadhaar paid for its survival that
proved pivotal to the turn digital governance took, a *longue durée*
origin of the issues framing the 2019 protests against CAA.

Unlike Aadhaar, which to date presents its voluntary status like some
act of faith, the NPR flaunted its compulsory nature. Unlike the Census
of India, which worked on the premise of anonymized data, the NPR’s
register would be public, causing a problem when the single-point
Registrar General of the NPR was also the Census Commissioner. Aadhaar
was pivoted on the *individual* as the basic social unit. The NPR’s
basic social unit was instead the *family*, represented by its head who
became legally liable for every member of his family. NPR brought in 15
data sets, including marital status, educational qualifications, and
occupation. While family, marriage, occupation, and education sent out
their own alarm bells, the most worrisome was the category of ‘*usual*
resident’ (not resident). You had to have physically lived in the space
you gave as your address for a minimum of six months. You had to be
*socially known* there, and had to pass a ‘social audit’. Such an audit
would happen in the following way: Your biographical data along with
your photograph and your Aadhaar number would be publicly ‘displayed in
the local area for inviting claims and objections’, to be ‘scrutinized
by local officials’ and ‘placed in Gram Sabhas and Ward Committees’.
This process of social audit, said the NPR, was necessary to ‘bring in
transparency and equity’. [^06AshishRajadhayksha_53] Aadhaar’s Proof of Address (POA), in
accepting a wide range of documents and in its introducer mechanism, was
in sharp contrast far more relaxed.

The war spilled out in the open when the NPR announced that it too would
be gathering biometric data. What initially began as a relatively minor
spat over quality of data and the usefulness of iris scans became a turf
issue, sought to be resolved (in January 2012) by dividing up the
country into two halves, giving the NPR control over one half and
Aadhaar the other.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_54] When that didn’t work, a compromise was reached
in which NPR data would be sent to Aadhaar for deduplication, but if the
two data sets didn’t match, NPR’s data would prevail. Other
capitulations rapidly followed: the NPR, it was decided in 2010, would
include, alongside demographic data and biometric data, the Aadhaar
number. The final nail perhaps was this: India’s Identity Card, whenever
it is issued to all of India’s ‘usual residents’ over 18 years, would
have the Aadhaar number on it. In a full turn of the wheel, Aadhaar
finally *de facto* became the one thing that it has always specifically
said it is not.

Despite this capitulation there were, as technologist R. Swaminathan
wrote, ‘genuine divergences in the objectives of NPR and UIDAI. Their
worldviews are from different eras. While one is rooted in a mindset of
exclusion and security, the other is inclusive and participative.’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_55]
The NPR made no secret of what its chief proponent, former Home Minister
P. Chidambaram, was trying to set up: ‘21 sets of databases \[...\] to
achieve quick seamless and secure access to desired information for
intelligence and enforcement agencies’, including a DNA data bank, the
NATGRID, and a series of others such as the Crime and Criminals Tracking
Network and Systems (CCTNS) and a National Counter Terrorism Centre, all
of which were intended to work together to make a devastating and
unimaginable impact on surveillance.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_56]

## II

## 

## ‘Algorithms of Connectedness’: Theorizing Creep

> Function creep: the gradual widening of the use of a technology or
> system beyond the purpose for which it was originally intended, esp
> when this leads to potential invasion of privacy – Collins Dictionary

The epic conflict between Aadhaar and NPR, and the eventual capitulation
of the former, appeared to have been enabled by a relentless creep of
some sort. It was as though the traditional ambivalences inherent to the
definition of citizenship had led to a shadowy, sinister, sleight of
hand movement in which one thing was being claimed and another
attempted.

The conflict itself was largely technology-driven, but the problem
itself – and its terminology – appeared to arrive in arcane language, of
*citizenship* versus *population*, whose import would perhaps be more
familiar to students of Foucault and Partha Chatterjee than either
technologists or political activists. If Aadhaar was, in Chatterjee’s
sense, a populational database, the National *Population* Register,
contrary to its name, was explicitly a register of *citizenship*.
Indeed, the NPR was born under the 2004 amendment of the Citizenship
Act, 1955, with several new clauses reversing basic constitutional norms
that had returned the emphasis on ancestry, directly targeting ‘illegal’
migrants. Although the terminology was itself a minor matter, it
nevertheless pressed an alarm button. Was this purely creep? Could this
terminological confusion be illuminated by another rather more complex
*theoretical* social-scientific explanation, with a rather longer time
span, that might say something about the Indian state itself as it
mutated in the early years of the new millennium?

These fine distinctions didn’t seem so arcane in 2013 when Bezwada
Wilson of the Safai Karmachari Andolan (a movement for the elimination
of manual scavenging in India) and S.G. Vombatkere impleaded themselves
in the ongoing Supreme Court Writ Petition challenging the Aadhaar
program. Wilson, along with a few other
co-petitioners such as transgender and sexual minorities, brought in
specific concerns, namely identities thrust upon them that would *add
to* citizen discrimination, not take away from it.

In a long conversation with *Frontline*, Wilson outlines his issues with
Aadhaar. The central purpose of identity has to above all enable its
*repudiation*. This was because ‘identities of Dalits and Adivasis
should never be permanent; they should be able to transcend them’.
Dalits are ‘segregated in such a way very clearly, demarcated in
villages’. The problem manual scavengers face is how to ‘come out of the
identity and destroy it forever \[…\] any marginalised community, any
manual scavenging or vulnerable community wants to destroy its existing
identity; that is our whole struggle’.

> My basic problem is that \[Aadhar facilitates\] keeping identity
> forever. This is against my principle. Because it is a caste-ridden
> society and we already have identities. You don’t need any Aadhar;
> \[people are\] already branded so we don’t need any fingerprints or
> iris recognition \[…\] So you are branding; even if I come out of this
> and get liberation also, but in your Aadhaar, my occupation, where I
> come from, everything will be there. Once you get the data, you can
> segregate in any way by means of technology. See, you never used
> identity to support us, never purposely did a proper survey to
> identify and rehabilitate us. Now you want to give us an
> identity?[^06AshishRajadhayksha_57]

The ghostly illusions of two separate Aadhaars, one small, nimble and
upfront, and one large and shadowy in the background, were now intense.
On the face of it, Aadhaar’s explicit mandate was to facilitate the
entry, to identify the biological body shorn of cultural markers: it was
*designed* so that it didn’t have to ask the *safai karmachari* (a
cleaner/someone engaged in manual scavenging) his occupation. On the
other hand, the NPR *did* list occupation, as did identification surveys
such as the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their
Rehabilitation Act, 2013 that Wilson excoriates when he points out that
*safai karmachari*s are ‘immediately identified’ and ‘asked why are you
here for a job when there is 100 per cent reservation for your
community’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_58]

The issue wasn’t creep alone. It was creep stalking a more fundamental
slippage. We seemed to be looking at a designed ideological ambivalence
in the interoperability system. In a curious twist of fate, Aadhaar not
only capitulated to the NPR, it became the NPR’s public face.
Chameleon-like, even as it adopted the colors of whatever initiative it
came in under, it would end up becoming that initiative. As further
mismatches emerged, such slippages became routine: of Aadhar promising
something only to have its interoperable partner take it away – just one
of numerous instances being when Aadhaar’s culturally sensitive ‘third
gender’ category produced mismatches with PAN Cards (presently being
cross-linked with Aadhaar) that had built no such category.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_59] Little
Aadhaar increasingly became like an invitation to the parlor of an elite
Big Aadhaar citizenship club that professed nondiscrimination and entry
to all, only to reveal covert hierarchies and fine print designed to
reinforce segregation.

In 2017, the Supreme Court gave its much awaited omnibus judgment on
Aadhaar and privacy law. Although the five-bench judgment cleared
Aadhaar by a 4:1 majority, what caught attention was Justice D.Y.
Chandrachud’s extraordinary dissenting opinion.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_60] At a thousand
pages, nearly twice as long as the main judgment itself, it was, says
legal commentator Gautam Bhatia, a ‘dissent for the ages’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_61] Among
numerous sharp observations, Chandrachud caught and dissected the creep
with clinical precision. It is true, he noted, that Aadhaar itself
‘excludes storage of individual information related to race, religion,
caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, income or medical history’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_62]
However, when ‘Aadhaar is seeded into every database, it becomes a
bridge across discrete data silos, which allows anyone with access to
this information to re-construct a profile of an individual’s life’ and
so ‘the mandatory linking of Aadhaar with various schemes allows the
same result in effect’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_63] Section 7 of that Act has become an
ever-expanding single window ‘for the government to route more benefits,
subsidies and services \[…\] and expand the scope of Aadhaar’. This
section listed benefits that ranged from

> schemes for children \[…\] \[to\] meals under the Mid-day meal scheme,
> painting and essay competitions \[…\] \[to\] scholarships on merit,
> \[from\] schemes relating to rehabilitation of bonded labour and human
> trafficking \[…\] to access to tuberculosis care, pensions, schemes
> relating to labour and employment, skill development, personnel and
> training, agriculture and farmers’ welfare, primary and higher
> education, social justice, benefits for persons with disabilities,
> women and child development, rural development, food distribution,
> healthcare, panchayati raj, chemicals & fertilizers, water resources,
> petroleum and natural gas, science and technology, sanitation,
> textiles, urban development, minority affairs, road transport,
> culture, tourism, urban housing, tribal affairs and stipends for
> internship for students.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_64]

So that ‘from delivery to deliverance, almost every aspect of the cycle
of life would be governed by the logic of Aadhaar’. A legal and
administrative creep was riding on the technology that, you wonder,
could *surely* not have been entirely unintentional.

> When an individual from a particular caste engaged in manual
> scavenging is rescued and in order to take benefit of rehabilitation
> schemes, she/he has to link the Aadhaar number with the scheme, the
> effect is that a profile as that of a person engaged in manual
> scavenging is created in the scheme database. The stigma of being a
> manual scavenger gets permanently fixed to her/his identity. What the
> Aadhaar Act seeks to exclude specifically is done in effect by the
> mandatory linking of Aadhaar numbers with different databases, under
> cover of the delivery of benefits and services.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_65]

If Aadhaar and its linking process are the only visible part of an
iceberg, the insight is sharp enough to clue us into how this double act
fits into our larger project, of rewriting our digital past over two
decades as precisely a history of the management of an ambivalence*.* It
will, if we do it right, provide a new genealogy to where we found
ourselves in 2020, to internet shutdowns, and to Aarogya Setu. And
perhaps, with it, an even longer ancestry to the anti-CAA/NPR movements
that the pandemic momentarily sought to suppress. We may even know at
last what we are really up against.

## ‘Tommy Singh’ and the Indifferent Network

In 2015, in a remarkable essay that Justice D.Y. Chandrachud would in
fact quote in his dissenting judgment, Nishant Shah produced a
technologically informed understanding of the slippage. At the very
center of the self-definition of the Aadhaar project, he pointed out a
‘curious conflation \[…\] between the notions of iden*tity* and
iden*tification*’, both terms ‘constantly used interchangeably’. ‘The
UIDAI authority, both in its name, and in its documents framing the
technological infrastructure that would serve as the scaffolding for
effective e-governance in India, centrally talked of
identification.’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_66]

Such a conflation of two opposing concepts of identity – one based on
individual choice, the second explicitly without choice – would open a
‘new understanding of the individual’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_67] The person whose data was
being recorded was increasingly less you and me as we presumably
understood ourselves – as people capable of individual subjective choice
– and more a you-me looking in a distorting mirror and seeing an image
of ourselves created out of ‘predictive and self-correcting algorithms
that develop correlations, curations and connections between disparate
individuated transactions’. It was part of the design, said Shah, that
you and I found ourselves in a digital ecosystem, caught in between two
paradoxical imaginations of the individual. On the one side we were a
‘data subject’ and on the other a ‘quantified self’. The data subject
was offered a specific capability: of being imagined in such a way that
she was ‘no longer confined to the biological discreteness of \[…\]
existence’. Such a person became available to the world ‘through an
extended relationality enabled by digital traffic flows of ideas,
ideologies, and interactions’ – became thereby a *blurred entity*, in
turn blurring the lines between public and private. On the other hand, a
‘quantified self’ posited a very different sort of individual: as
‘atomic’, as no longer an actor but ‘produced through a series of
actions, understood as a networked entity that can be mined for data and
information, ranging from genetic blue-prints to socio-cultural
profiles’.

This conflation triggered multiple anxieties. These were in part ‘about
the fallibility of historical precedent’, but mostly about ‘the
unimaginability of the post-human futures that the individual embodies’.
They would sometimes manifest themselves as a ‘fear for the loss of
individual and human control and growing power of digital networks’. At
other times they would ‘call for accepting the emergent digital networks
of life and love’ in order to enable us to build entirely new and
perhaps ‘more transparent and accountable systems of governance and
regulation’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_68]

Shah’s ‘data subject’, blurring the lines between public and private,
was (to return to the terminologies used at the top of this section) our
*citizen*. Such a subject was defined primarily through the capacity for
*choice*: to choose how to best reflect her identity or, as Wilson’s
Dalit and Adivasi example requires, to repudiate it. Faced up to this
kind of citizen-subject was another ‘quantified self’ that possessed
none of these freedoms of either choice or repudiation. Here your
identity was handed down by a machine, an identifi*cation* produced by a
complex algorithmic arrangement that collated all the data produced by
you and about you and decided something about you – whether you were
above or below the poverty line, if poor what your bodily needs were, if
rich what your net worth was and what luxuries might be advertised to
you. This was a *populational* procedure, where you were viewed as just
a number to whom a certain benefit had to be delivered or a luxury sold,
not a thinking and feeling human being.

Even as anxiety levels about privacy skyrocketed, the popularly held
view came to be that a right to privacy could only be realized when my
private self was walled off and made technologically entirely separate
from the data-gathering mechanism. A more complex view was its opposite,
to see how my two selves – the blurred choice-based self in which inhere
my citizenship entitlements and the hypervisible, enumerative
identification apparatus of the population that produced another self of
me – could be *better synced*, so that the right of choice was not
entirely lost when the process of enumeration kicked in. There was a
third view that would directly confront us with the fear of state
governance: where the second identity might entirely replace the first,
freezing us all into faceless beneficiaries.

Shah proposes on his side the concept of an ‘indifferent network’. He
suggests that in its very indifference lay its potential, and outlines
his argument with the metaphor of the dog on the Aadhaar card. This was
a famous episode that had caused much hilarity on the internet, when a
bona fide Aadhaar ID was made in Bhind, Madhya Pradesh, for a dog named
Tommy Singh, son of Sheru Singh, born on November 26, 2009.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_69] The
incident, says Shah, led to several expected responses, most of them
variations on the fond hope that ‘these networked phenomena \[might
build\] an implicit relationship with the exterior and with the human
subject’. This hope was itself never unpacked or questioned. Inevitably,
when questions are posed about the relationship between networks and
reality, ‘instead of looking at how networks fail to represent and map
the exterior, the problem is posed as the exterior not measuring up to
the parameters and models that the network produces’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_70]

Shah saw Tommy Singh rather differently. The famous Aadhaar dog was not
a failed stand-in for a person, but as a ‘stand-in for the data
scattered across databases which, because of their correlation now
identify this dog as a resident of India, and probably even feed it into
the National Population Register which was linked with Aadhaar in the
last census’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_71] Such data has no exteriority; it exists inside a
self-referential network that develops its content only in the way it
travels.

From here Shah made two prescient and radical propositions. Firstly, a
blanket statement that the *individual*, whether human or canine, ‘has
no space in the computational logic that informs our new structures of
governance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_72] The dog in Aadhaar’s imagination is in the end ‘as
much an actor or an individual or the bearer of an identifier/identity
as any other human being enrolled into the system’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_73] It can become
such an actor only if we recognized that we were looking at an
‘indifferent network’. Such a claim of indifference clashed directly
with the PR claims made by the 2009 UID working paper which spoke of the
caring nature of a data network ‘committed to mapping the individual in
all its difference through the constantly expanding databases of
quantified measurement’. The facts, to Shah, were rather different:
networks were the very opposite of caring, indifferent to ‘the
individual and its expressions’. Under the black-and-white
ambivalence-free conditions of digital governance, the fiction of the
‘reasonable man’, which has been at the heart of legal regulation and
justice, has been absolutely replaced by another set of tools for
producing reason and rationality. These tools of reason are
self-learning and iterative algorithms that make connections at speeds
unfathomable to human faculties. As networks propelled by such tools
grow, they ‘reinforce this inherent paradox of the individual as unique
– having a unique identifier – but also the individual as \[…\] an actor
that can be mined for data, queried, and stored in mobile data
sets’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_74]

Herein, says Shah in his second proposition, lies the hope. Identity,
which had in its analogue construction included the right *not* to be
identified, has been ‘flipped so that identification through
identifiers, and the data that accrues \[…\] becomes the only form of
identity in the time of database governance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_75] At the same time,
when a networked governance database system ‘does not treat the
appearance of the dog as a glitch, but just another data set which helps
make new correlations and predictions possible’, then, linguistically
speaking, ‘*the network is actually closer to the etymological
understanding of identity* than how we recognise it in common
utterance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_76]

The possibilities of analogue blurriness morph into those of network
indifference. If in analogue conditions the Dalit and the Adivasi claim
the right to change or repudiate their historical identity, in the time
of digital indifference a dog too can become an enumerable entity. A new
techno-social framework has to be imagined if we are to account for ‘the
machine function of identification’ that can offer new ‘inroads into
looking at what happens when our identities are mediated, mitigated,
facilitated, and contained by the ways in which networked technologies
of authentication and verification operate’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_77]

As we worry about how such mediated identities may once more be ‘wedded
to the human expression of identity’, Tommy Singh suggests a new
possibility. It is one of ‘reconceptualising the individual as a
networked subject, constituted by processes of mediation between older
categories of being and new logics of digital computation’. Instead of
being seen as contradictory and perennially at war, these two logics
could instead be reintegrated ‘towards a more robust framework for
governance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_78]

## ‘Who is a person?’: Identity Collapse, Psychological Numbing, and the Citizen-Killer

So where does identity lie? Partha Chatterjee asks this very question in
the context of a major identity crisis that occurred at a crucial
historical moment in late colonial India that shaped several principles
of governmentality in times to come.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_79] This was a famous dispute,
much retold in popular fiction and cinema, of a dissolute *zamindar*
(landowner) in rural Bengal who died of syphilis and was ritually
cremated. Years later, when a *sannyasi* (a
Hindu mendicant ascetic) appeared in Dhaka claiming to be the dead man,
the British establishment was ranged, in its determination to prove the
reincarnated figure an impostor, against an Indian side that included
most (though not all) of his family that was equally committed to
proving that he was indeed the erstwhile landlord returned to life. A
fierce legal battle would begin in Calcutta[^06AshishRajadhayksha_80] and go all the way to
the Privy Council in London, taking us to the very gist of both the
possibilities and limitations of identity as posing a very real crisis
of state.

The British administrative answer clearly saw identity, as Aadhaar does,
as bodily property. As such it was something unique, decipherable, and
entirely unshakeable. Bodies were entitled to only one identity, and
there could be no choice in the matter. The full powers of the colonial
apparatus were therefore applied to reveal (unsuccessfully in the end)
that the *sannyasi* had to be a fraud. Reading in the possibility of the
second covert self the ‘secret history of Indian nationalism’,
Chatterjee offers a political interpretation for where the colonial
fault lines lay in this extraordinary dispute over who the *sannyasi*
said he was. A founding principle, upon which the entire apparatus of
sovereignty stood, was in its control over naming a person as a man and
a citizen, and in ensuring that *all* human beings possessed a
technically and socially verifiable identity. The apparatus of
governance would pivot over a ‘narrow (assumption) that insists on
physical and psychological continuity based on normal causes and
verified by scientific method’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_81]

Arun Mohan Sukumar speaks of another trajectory of colonial anxiety, of
what happens if this founding principle of governance fails, in projects
that took place as recently as the 90s. In his history of technology in
independent India, Sukumar says that the failure of India’s vaccine and
genome projects were in large part due to ‘the subcontinent’s long and
dismal history of using biological attributes of Indians to serve in the
British Raj’. From the mid-19th century, Sukumar shows how
fingerprinting had been explicitly linked to criminal tracking, and the
Indian Evidence Act of 1899 was the world’s first legislation
recognizing this technology. And so it was that when India first piloted
automated fingerprint detection in 1992, it was the ‘historical
provenance of techniques and technologies that involved harvesting
information from the human body \[that\] made them unpalatable to
Indians young and old’. [^06AshishRajadhayksha_82]

‘Partition took place when human rights movements were more or less
unknown, in a world just getting accustomed to genocide and ethnic
cleansing’, writes Ashis Nandy, in an extraordinary series of texts that
reveal the crisis of selfhood that that episode in our history caused to
the question of identity. Nandy has been interested in the social
history of elusive ‘multiple selves’, a fundamental challenge to the
question of who a person is, and in one such example he links this
multiplicity to a situation of ‘psychological numbing’, when normal
human beings took part in genocide as a condition of normalcy. In an
intriguingly titled essay (‘Coming Home: Religion, Mass Violence and the
Exiled and Secret Selves of a Citizen-Killer’),[^06AshishRajadhayksha_83] Nandy discusses a
man named Madanlal Pahwa. He was a participant in the plot to
assassinate Gandhi, for which he was convicted and did 17 years in jail.
A largely forgotten man in his 80s, he lived in Bombay, disconnected
from contemporary politics when Nandy and Rajni Bakshi met him. Over
many conversations, Pahwa defended his extreme views but called himself
a humanist, claimed to be a *kattar* Hindu (hardcore Hindu) when growing
up but remembered the *qawwali*s (a style of Sufi devotional music) at
the *mazar* (Muslim shrine) of Baba Farid Shakarganj during his
childhood, admitted to numerous acts of violence and killing in many
cities, but said he felt no hatred for either Muslims or for Gandhi.
Pahwa saw no internal contradiction between these multiple selves,
saying mostly that what he did was a consequence of the times.

Chatterjee connects the two eras, and two selves, thus. ‘Just as the
anti-absolutist desire for individual liberty produced the dictum in the
reformed criminal law that one must be presumed innocent until proven
guilty’, so we find a ‘corresponding desire for the welfare of
populations’. This latter desire – very familiar to today’s urban
migrants seeking to find some way by which they may return home – is
reflected in the further dictum that ‘*one must be presumed to be an
impostor until proven otherwise*’. The two maxims, presumed innocent
till proven guilty and presumed impostor by default, are ‘not
contradictory, but entirely consistent within the domain of modern
governance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_84]

Justice Chandrachud apparently saw no such possibilities in modern
governance in his expansive dissenting judgment. Although his
conclusions were different, framed largely along classic constitutional
lines, he nevertheless recognized the key category that was now in
serious danger, in a way no legal or policy document of the time seemed
to have done – namely the pared down networked subject surviving on a
tenuous identity lifeline.

One of the central contentions of the petitioners in that 2017 Supreme
Court Writ Petition was that ‘at its core, Aadhaar alters the
relationship between the citizen and the State’, that it ‘diminishes the
status of the citizens’ in the way it sets them up in some kind of
trade-off, a *bartering process*.

> Rights freely exercised, liberties freely enjoyed, entitlements
> granted by the Constitution and laws are all made conditional, on a
> compulsory barter. The barter compels the citizens to give up their
> biometrics ‘voluntarily’, allows her biometrics and demographic
> information to be stored by the State and private operators and then
> used for a process termed ‘authentication’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_85]

The petitioners did not see any of the negotiations that were enabled
between different data sets swirling within Shah’s indifferent networks.
To them, the bartering away of choice-based citizenship had only one
inevitable result: the subordination, and eventual stamping out, of
basic citizenship rights by the enumerated self. And if for any reason
such devastation did not occur, the state possessed one final nuclear
option: the ability to – in the Court’s chilling phrase – cause ‘civil
death’ by simply switching off any person’s Aadhaar connection.
Deletion, blocking or rendering inaccessible an Aadhaar identity was
potentially equivalent to extermination.

Chandrachud’s dissent, effectively agreeing with the petitioners, quoted
Shah’s essay at some length, adopting experience of tension internal to
identity – pulling people apart as it reintegrates them into
technologically-enabled data subjects. While accepting the argument that
the ‘quantified self’ is produced through data as it gets distributed
across various systems and this ‘curates \[…\] a comprehensive profile
of an individual’, he reads a rather darker, grimmer consequence into
this than Shah himself may have intended. To Chandrachud, such
quantification poses an unambiguous danger to citizenship rights, for he
reads the ‘flipping’ of the right as undermining your ability to be
identified *at all*, as it becomes, slowly and stealthily, *the only
form of identity* you have available to you under database governance.
This, he ruled, violated freedoms and liberties guaranteed by Part III
of the Constitution premised on choice in the means of identification
for proving identity. ‘Requiring an individual to prove identity on the
basis of one mode alone will \[…\] violate the right of
self-determination and free choice’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_86]

For all the technological novelty of digitization, for Chandrachud the
issue was still one of freedom classically framed. It bore similarity
then to Safoora Zargar’s solitary confinement claimed as quarantine,
where she is currently fighting for the right to be spoken of in the
basic terms of liberty and self-determination. Central to both was the
*control by the state of the bodily subject* emanating from the invasive
‘curation’ of that body into an identity tag. Perhaps the most dangerous
aspect of Zargar’s incarceration is the claim that this is being done
for both her own good and that of society. It is the way technology
defines sovereignty, integrating the ‘social good’ into the production
of her identity as a terrorist and a candidate for UAPA treatment, that
we need to analyze next.

In many ways, control over the bodily subject remains the defining
center of the modern state’s existence. It is, as Giorgio Agamben says,
the founding principle of its sovereignty. There is some similarity
between the decultured and pared down bodily identity (a blank-slate
*tabula rasa* that, we felt in 2009, may have had some salience to the
UID’s basic system of creating unique identities) and Agamben’s
well-known conception of ‘bare life’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_87] If the basic paradigm of
state control over bare life originates in the concentration camp, the
origins of sovereignty too lie in various ‘States of Exception’.

Such States of Exception lie in zones needing surveillance, benefit, or
other special attention. They may be spaces controlled by the Armed
Forces Special Powers Act, 1958. They may be spaces of drought, or
natural or man-made disaster. (Or they may be the ‘containment zones’ of
the present pandemic when all humans are defined only as either
COVID-positive or asymptomatic). The main point is that such States of
Exception gradually morph and expand, so that gradually ‘exclusion and
inclusion, outside and inside, *bios* and *zoē*, right and fact’ all
come together to become a ‘zone of irreducible indistinction’, and the
concentration camp becomes an increasingly normalized everyday
condition.

Such an everyday normalization of extreme control appears relevant to
Justice Chandrachud’s anxieties over how the state deals with the
sovereign body: and what might happen if the survival of such a body,
controlled by the state, came to be leashed to its Aadhaar alter ego
almost like a kind of RFID tag. It defines the further possibility that
pulling the Aadhaar plug on any person might ensure a body-endangering
‘civil death’.

In 2020, such a sovereign body dominating the Indian political horizon
was that of India’s migrant workers, who – ever since the invocation of
the Disaster Management Act and the lockdown – literally started
walking, in their millions, across the length of the country, going
home, often asserting their determination never to return. The pandemic
was used to block their departure in every way possible: through closed
borders, suspension of transport, and multiple other means, of which one
is especially relevant to our argument.

The full story of the largest physical migration the subcontinent may
have ever seen, determinedly returning from city to country, reversing
the foundational move that had defined the 20th century, will of course
be told some day. Meanwhile, at least *some* of the reasons for this
blocking are blatantly obvious. These people provide the labor that
keeps the urban economy going, from manufacturing to services; their
departure threatens its collapse. The point here is that Aadhaar, as a
portable identity, was surely *designed* for just such a cataclysmic
event: especially when both the central and several state governments,
realizing that they may have created a problem far larger than the
pandemic, began making various kinds of delivery of benefit, of food and
shelter, and in limited cases of transportation, available to bona fide
returnees.

What happened next allows us to open an entirely new inquiry into the
genealogy of key instruments of governance in independent India,
including those over which Justice Chandrachud had agonized. The
promised aid mostly never arrived. Numerous laborers, who had been
living in spaces provided by labor contractors with no money and no
food, found themselves disqualified from taking the trains being
provided because they didn’t have their village address on their Aadhaar
card, and so couldn’t prove that their destination was their home. Most
of these people had gotten these cards only when they had come to the
city, as a mandatory requirement to open a bank account and thus to
receive their wages and other ‘benefit’. Most would have been without
proof of address (POA) and would have used ‘introducers’ – an innovative
feature of Aadhaar in which undocumented people could get their identity
if ‘introduced’ along a certain procedure, and which had in fact signed
an MOU in July 2010 with a national coalition of several organizations
specifically to design a strategy for migrant workers[^06AshishRajadhayksha_88] – and most
would have had to give their temporary workplace as their address.
Aadhaar, by refusing to believe where they came from, was now
*preventing* them from proving who they were.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_89] It is hard to
describe their condition – without aid, unable to go back home because
they couldn’t prove that it was home, unable to cross state boundaries –
as anything but a form of civil death.

By now a pattern has surely emerged in the inevitable creep. Instead of
tracking the delivery of benefit, the system had inverted itself into
tracking the beneficiary. The onus lay on the migrant laborer to prove
*her* identity against the overwhelming *default assumption that she was
not who she said she was*. As several states too began closing their
borders to returnees for fear of virus contamination, loss of identity
began alarmingly to resemble political statelessness. The multiple
tensions – layered with the historical memories of famine, disease and
both natural and human catastrophe – into which the human body was now
inserted revealed several of Justice Chandrachud’s explicit fears about
the state’s near-totalitarian capacity to shut off the identity
lifeline.

Inevitably, the images of men, women and children, old and young, in
bullock carts, on trains, in trucks, on bicycle and overwhelmingly on
foot, trudging down streets and railway tracks to cross the nation,
evoked the migrations that followed the Partition. This was not just
image recall, although there was something relentless about the
similarity between what we saw now and what we had seen in the mid-40s.

There was an additional reason. Then as now, amid the baffling
determination of vast numbers of people to go ‘home’, in the astonishing
incapability of both the central and state administrations to deliver
benefit, whether as food, money, shelter or transport, lay a basic
*collapse of identity*. I mean identity collapse in two ways: one, a
globally familiar economic paradigm of invisibilizing the poor; and,
two, a paradigm that may be closer to the subcontinent, in which who you
are depends foundationally on your ability to name a *home*, such as (if
not only) a nation. Who could these people be, if not citizens of
*some*where?

As in Saadat Hasan Manto’s legendary short story of the Partition, the
location of the village of Toba Tek Singh is the only identity of the
lunatic Bishan Singh, who – utterly confused by the political division
taking place – finally finds himself ‘after fifteen years on his feet’
‘face down on the ground’ with India on one side and Pakistan on the
other, and his village of Toba Tek Singh ‘in the middle, on a piece of
land that had no name’ – so too these migrants found themselves in an
identity abyss and told to quarantine themselves in it.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_90]

## III

## 

## Careers of Corporeality 

The body corporeal – the body incarcerated – is a classic empty
signifier. It thus possesses a potential for meaning that can appear
both terrifying and uncontrolled, across religious and political
ideologies. The institutions of its (political, sexual, subjective)
containment define the repressions of the modern public sphere. Control
over such a body is thus a crucial signifying site for state
sovereignty. When an identity is lashed to that body, it is a key aspect
of that control for its putative elusiveness can be a source of anxiety
as much for the sovereignty of the state as for its subjects.

Such elusiveness of identity can occur both when a body loses its
identity and when identity exists independently of any bodily anchor.
Both phenomena trace back at least to colonial times and may well
precede it by several centuries in other social-religious traditions.
Here we look at more recent history to track, post-2000, the political,
legal, and administrative morphing of bodily signification.

Sometime around 2012, legal scholar Kalyani Ramnath, still a student at
the National Law School in Bangalore and participant-blogger on the CSCS
Identity Project site, was developing an interesting take on India’s
historical ambivalence around citizenship. Like many legal scholars, she
too took the problem back to founding documents, but instead of going to
the Citizenship Act, 1955 she went instead to the Constitution’s
well-known Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP).

These Principles have been, it is well known, controversial. Viewed as
Ambedkar’s explicit intervention bringing a moral and ideological edge
to the document, they have also been critiqued as relegating social and
economic rights to a section of the Constitution ‘that was explicitly
and intendedly noncognizable in a court of law’, says Niraja Gopal
Jayal.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_91] The launch of neoliberalism, more or less since the onset of
globalization, however, saw these Principles returned to curious
prominence.

Since the 80s, an ‘expansive interpretation of Article 21’ saw the
Supreme Court read a variety of unenumerated rights into the
Constitution, says Jayal.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_92] These included the right to shelter, to
pollution-free environments, to privacy and medical aid, and to
elimination of bonded labor. This trend only accelerated with
globalization. ‘Curiously’, says Jayal, ‘neoliberal ascendance has also
been a period in which many social and economic rights have come to be
legislated, and the air is thick with many more such rights signalled in
activist slogans as well as judicial pronouncements’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_93] By the 2000s,
the overuse of the language of rights – and early signs that they were
serving a purpose that might be precisely the opposite of what was
intended – had set up multiple alerts. In 2004, Jean Drèze, speaking of
the Right to Food campaign launched in Rajasthan and mounted on Article
21,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_94] was deeply concerned that this right not be reduced to a purely
justiciable aspect. The complex reasons for this right needed, more than
ever, a return to an Ambedkarian ‘revolutionary conception of democracy’
that existed in the umbrella protections of the Directive Principles.

Kalyani Ramnath’s inquiry, written in this time and context began (in a
short and provocative essay she wrote in 2012) with the famous first
three words of the Constitution. Although the entire document is as
though written in the name of ‘We the People’, as it unfolds, there is a
strange disappearance of ‘the people’ as active agents. As she tries to
puzzle out this disappearance, she encounters another slippage that
would be of some relevance in the early 2000s. From the larger and more
abstract category of the ‘people’ emerges a second and very much more
concrete subset, that of ‘citizens’. Not all people can be citizens.

> The Constitution of India is not drafted in the name of citizens,
> although in practice, many of the Fundamental Rights (to speech,
> assembly or religion) may be claimed only by them. As with many other
> constitutions, it is drafted in the name of ‘We the People’, a phrase
> prominently placed in the Preamble, never again to appear in any of
> the other provisions.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_95]

The ‘people’ reappear in force in the Directive Principles, for it is of
course in their name that the social revolution is being envisaged. What
ends up getting outlined, however, sounds to her like a rather ‘random
assortment of principles, presenting a confused, fragmented ‘moral’
vision for a social revolution’ – such as ‘improvements in agriculture,
health, education and legal aid services’, *panchayati raj* to attempt
to put in place a uniform civil code, and to ban cow slaughter – in all
of which the ‘people’ exist only as a moral force to whom the state has
a duty.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_96]

In contrast to such ‘people’ and their abstract moral authority,
citizens emerge far more concretely as those who *did things for the
State* in return for the rights they received. Even as the Directive
Principles reveal an imagination of ‘the people’ to whom duties are
owed, they also ‘simultaneously reveal the state’s expectations from
them’, says Ramnath, thus creating from the people a subset of citizens
who are ‘productive people’, workers, ‘imperative to building a modern
nation-state’.

> The slippages in the constitutional text \[…\] offer insights into the
> nature of ‘the people’. Education, public assistance and creation of
> just and humane conditions of work for everyone and a just social
> order are what the state owes to its people. Adequate means of
> livelihood and free legal aid are only promised to ‘citizens’. The
> same was the case with the proposed uniform civil code. Finally, a
> living wage and participation in the management of industry are
> promised only to workers, reflecting an emphasis on providing equal
> opportunities for productive labour.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_97]

In a way, the Directive Principles speak ‘to a multitude’ for they are
addressed to all people – including ‘citizens, workers, women and men in
differing degrees’. This multitude is expected to be empowered and
productive. But what if some of them are and some not?

> The social consequences of living in a nation-state are, then, firmly
> tied not only to official recognition of a political identity, but are
> also rooted in the ability of ‘the people’, in all the varied
> understandings of that phrase, to contribute to the building of the
> nation-state. The state may well choose to ignore non-productive lives
> while embarking on different aspects of its social revolution \[…\]
> choose to exclude many others in its grand march towards a transformed
> social situation, for example, by branding the undocumented as
> ‘illegal’ or treating the poor as dispensable.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_98]

Building on Ramnath’s argument, I want to outline a particular
techno-normative maneuver that took place in the dichotomy she discovers
between ‘people’ and ‘citizens’. The ‘people’, already a conceptual
abstraction, an anonymous mass, were now also *technologically*
anonymized in specific ways. As recipients of state benefit, they did
nothing but receive – they could, as Jayal says, only consume. What they
*could* produce was *data*. And in a sharp departure from the practices
of anonymization by the Census, this data had an unprecedented
capability to be tagged to its bodily producers.

Meanwhile, ‘citizens’ who had the capability to self-define as
*productive people* were further qualified to become (to use language
from the Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery) Rules,
2011) *persons*, more precisely *natural persons.*[^06AshishRajadhayksha_99] A key qualifier
of such personhood was their *right over data*: specifically the right
to own what the IT Rules name Sensitive Personal Data (SPD) – listed
there as passwords, financial information (such as bank account or
credit card or debit card or other payment instrument details),
physical, physiological and mental health conditions, sexual
orientation, medical records and history, and biometric information.

From the early 2000s, privacy law dominated the debate on digitization.
And dominating the privacy debate were the *entitlements* of what the
B.N. Srikrishna Committee, set up in 2018 to outline a data protection
law, named *Data Principals.*[^06AshishRajadhayksha_100] These were legatees of our
citizen-subjects capable of individual subjective choice, the small
populational percentage of ‘natural subjects’ who actually qualified for
privacy. Although the Committee did cast a wide net around data, with
significant sections on identifiability, anonymization, community data
and nonconsensual data gathering processes, it was firm in its core
commitment that ‘the primary value that any data protection framework
serves must be that of privacy’. Srikrishna worries about what else
should be included in SPD – he considers, for example, adding trade
union membership – and is inevitably bothered by the special conditions
under which consent is suspended in the name of ‘larger public
interest’. There is little evidence here of Justice Chandrachud’s many
concerns about the conditions under which the corporeal gets coercively
identified by data over which the person has no control, or tagged by
technologies, or the possibility of switching off tagging to cause
‘civil death’. Such a body goes simply missing in the Srikrishna
Committee report. It appears only in two contexts: as the entity
requiring anonymization, or as the entity submitting to involuntary
consent.

As social rights for a new category of meritocratic ‘productive citizen’
came to be inverted into a segregation logic for *elite* privileges,
these rights also inverted several of the beneficiaries of the
group-differentiated ‘backward’ categories of the Constitution. Although
antipoverty programs were confined to target populations and meant for
the poor, Jayal points to a ‘curious bifurcation’ that occurs as elites
find themselves in a position to cherry-pick which services they should
appropriate and which they had no need for. Some services, such as water
and electricity, although subsidized in the name of the poor, become
‘effectively available only to the nonpoor and are sometimes almost
exclusively appropriated by the well-off’, whereas others, such as
public education and health, for which the elites have no desire, are
allowed to decline, since ‘the classes that have political voice do not
have any stake in their improvement, while the classes that are entirely
dependent on these services lack the voice to effect such change’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_101]

In contrast to the ‘Data Principals’ defined by the draft Personal Data
Protection Bill, 2019, another category of biopolitical ‘person’ came to
be parallelly created in this time: for example, by the 2019 amendment
of the UAPA which introduced an amendment allowing for a ‘person
affected by inclusion of his name in the Fourth Schedule as a
terrorist’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_102] Although these were also named physical manifestations
of abstract corporeality, they were bodies to be feared and contained.
They had no control over the data that they produced, as the overt
purpose of such data increasingly became surveillance. As the need to
demonstrate sovereign control became a growing political concern, the
legislation of the time typically visibilized these bodies, I hope to
show below, into those of the *peasant*, the *illegal migrant*, the
*terrorist*, and the *dissident*.

The ‘propensity of formal citizenship to *legitimize and entrench
inequality* is reinvented every day in social and political practice’
writes Jayal.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_103] And it happens ‘not least through such a severance
of welfare entitlements from the status of citizenship’. ‘Not being
universal, social and economic provisioning \[…\] did not attach to
citizenship in the way in which civil and political rights were
integrally linked to it’, and so benefit came commonly to be described
using the ‘language of relief, charity, and alleviation’.

As I track the genealogy of identity in the many judgments, Rules, White
Papers and Acts that took place – roughly between 2000, when the first
Information Technology Act was passed, and 2019, when the CAA and UAPA
were both amended – I shall try and show how targeting – or the
‘determination of eligibility’ – became what Jayal calls a ‘defining
marker of the normative aspiration contained in the idea of
citizenship’. While the ever-growing number of rights being extended to
an abstracted mass of beneficiaries ‘cultivate the impression of
improved access to substantive citizenship for disadvantaged groups’,
what they did was in fact something else. The ‘severance of particular
sets of rights from the civic status entrenched already existing
hierarchies of citizenship, through a *paradoxical inversion* that
places those who need or get social rights far below those who do
not’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_104]

## Degrees of Connectedness

The identity question that arose to prominence between 2004 and 2008,
the key years of the first term of the UPA government,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_105] was almost
entirely framed within the emerging managerial logic of delivery of
services and benefits. By 2007, one account shows that 151 Centrally
Sponsored Schemes existed for delivery of benefit, entailing annual
expenditures of about INR 72,000 crore, of which 30 key schemes alone
accounted for INR 64,000 crore.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_106] To give a flavor of both the
opportunity and worry characterizing the time, I summarize a sample case
made by three influential theorists, Devesh Kapur, Partha Mukhopadhyay
and Arvind Subramanian, on what they wanted India to do.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_107]

Kapur et al. begin – as did Nilekani in *Imagining India* – with
leakage, and the Rajiv Gandhi ‘15 paise for every rupee’ model. To solve
this, they propose a complex segregation of beneficiaries. The core
argument is disarmingly direct: if 27.5 percent of India’s roughly 1.13
billion people are below the poverty line, and if they form
approximately 70 million households, then what needs to be done is
simply to transfer INR 2,140 each month in cash to these households,
enabling them to ‘buy the entire monthly PDS entitlement of 35 kilograms
of rice or wheat in the open market, even at relatively high current
market prices’.

It was breathtakingly simple, but there was one problem. It was how to
*identify*. Given the scale and importance of what was being envisaged,
it was ‘vital to realise that *establishing an individual’s identity is
more important than establishing her eligibility*’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_108]

Partha Chatterjee wrote, coincidentally, another essay in the same
journal in the week after Kapur et al.’s sweeping single-point solution
for all of India’s economic troubles. It focused on the key weak point
in their argument, as he addressed the same transformation taking place
in India, but read rather different things in it – things that, although
not apparently connected with his book *A Princely Impostor?* discussed
earlier, may still allow us to extend the argument he made there.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_109]
If in *A Princely Impostor?* Chatterjee was speaking of identity in
colonial India, here he was speaking about the identity of another
elusive category, namely India’s *peasantry*.

Chatterjee too notes, with Kapur et al., the spread of technologies
distributing ‘education, health services, food, roadways, water,
electricity, agricultural technology, emergency relief and dozens of
other welfare services’ that have ‘penetrated deep into the interior of
everyday peasant life’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_110] To him, however, it leads to a rather
different crisis of identity than it does Kapur et al. The entire slew
of government policies are devised to ‘*reverse* the effects of
primitive accumulation’. There is a loss of an *economic* identity as
‘more and more primary producers, i.e., peasants, artisans and petty
manufacturers \[…\] lose their means of production’, but these victims
of primitive accumulation find themselves unlikely to be absorbed in the
new growth sectors of the economy. As a new economy takes over, we find
a ‘degree of connectedness between peasant cultivation, trade and credit
networks in agricultural commodities, transport networks, petty
manufacturing and services in rural markets and small towns, etc, that
makes it necessary for us to categorise all of them as part of a single,
but stratified, complex’.

Their role in this new economy is rendered ‘marginalised and \[…\]
useless as far as the sectors dominated by corporate capital are
concerned’. On the other hand, leaving them to ‘the passive revolution
under conditions of electoral democracy’ would be to ‘leave these
marginalised populations without the means of labour to simply fend for
themselves’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_111]

It also carried the major risk of ‘turning them into the ‘dangerous
classes’’. In another instance of the dependence on tagging, these
peasants find themselves entirely dependent on state agencies for their
benefit and end up focusing their skills on ‘manipulating and
pressurising these agencies to deliver these benefits’. Chatterjee would
perhaps agree that the migrant laborers left stranded in the lockdown in
March, April and May of 2020 were precisely this ‘dangerous class’ of
his dispossessed peasantry, left stranded physically as well as in the
way they fell through the cracks between the sudden withdrawal of state
welfare and the inability of the new economy to define their existence.

Diverse forms of dangerousness and diverse victims have been in the air
since late 2019 when (as we well know!) the Citizenship Act, 1955 was
amended for the second time in two decades. The agitations that
convulsed the nation led to sustained legal scrutiny of not only the
amended CAA itself (and of its incendiary Section 2 (1)(b) that ‘any
person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into
India on or before the 31st day of December, 2014 \[…\] shall not be
treated as illegal migrant’)[^06AshishRajadhayksha_112] but also to the link between this
CAA, its earlier 2004 amendment, and the NPR. We return, inexorably, to
2000, when the Information Technology Act was first passed, and to 2003,
when the Rules on Registration of Citizens and Issue of National
Identity Cards was approved. The 2003 Rules were the first time when a
‘Local Register of Indian Citizens’ was defined, when ‘individuals whose
Citizenship is doubtful’ would be weeded out.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_113]

It was also the first time that the question of *illegal migrants or
foreigners* would begin to receive visibility as the defining feature of
citizenship. The very theory of identity now meant, first and foremost,
isolating these people, when in 2004 the Citizenship (Amendment) Act
declared *descent*, rather than *birth*, as providing the right of
citizenship. That same year, 2004, the UAPA was also amended, and would
over the next two decades find several famous targets in some of the
country’s best known political dissidents: Binayak Sen, a doctor and
vice president of the People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL); Maoist
leader Kobad Ghandy; all the lawyers, academics, and social scientists
arrested after the Bhima-Koregaon agitation; Assamese peasant activist
Akhil Gogoi; Telugu poet and activist Varavara Rao and many others,
before coming in 2020 to Safoora Zargar and other students from Jamia
Millia and Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU). The two Amendments were
separate, but need to be read together for the new ‘dangerous class’ –
fusing migrants, terrorists, displaced peasantry, and political
dissidents – to emerge.

## The Data Fiduciary Arrives

On March 3, 2006, the Department of Information Technology (at the time
still inside the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology)
was tasked with setting up a ‘Unique Identification for BPL Families’.
Over the next 18 months, several ministries would go into overdrive to
create a mechanism for what a key strategic vision document published
that August called a ‘Unique Identification of *Residents*’. There are
rumors that this document was written by Wipro, briefly hired by the
Planning Commission as a consultant for the design phase and program
management of the pilot, and which had already submitted a document
titled ‘Does India Need a Unique Identity Number?’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_114]

Through 2006, these documents and discussions pivoted on residents –
that is, on *everybody* – and not only citizens. A 2008 Expert Committee
on Metadata and Data Standards defined the purpose of its Personal
Identification Codification Standards to ‘identify *each and every
person uniquely* at the national level’ to ensure ‘interoperability of
information related to individuals collected by various Govt./non Gov.
organizations’, to ‘ensure data integrity and smooth horizontal and
vertical data exchange related to the individuals across the domain
applications’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_115] The data being sought would be elaborate: name,
gender, marital status, language, religion, occupation, education, and a
few other categories. There would be different recipient agencies for
the date being generated. Language and religion data would be sent to
the Registrar General of India for the NPR. Occupation data would go to
the Ministry of Statistics and Programming Implementation, Education
data to the Department of Higher Education, and relationship (to head of
family) data, interestingly, to the Indian Council of Social Science
Research (ICSSR) and the Anthropological Survey of India (ASI).

That December, the penny dropped. An Empowered Group of Ministers (EgoM)
was set up to ‘collate the *National Population Register* under the
Citizenship Act, 1955, and the *Unique Identification Number project* of
the Department of IT’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_116] *Our hairy outsider muscling into the
neighborhood turned out to be a separated-at-birth twin. *

So how were we taken in, in 2009? I still believe that there was good
reason why, when we conceived our project and then did fieldwork in
seven states in 2010–2011, we located our ‘ambivalence’ in the
internecine row between Aadhaar and the NPR. I’ve talked about it
earlier in this essay, so shall only add that this almighty row confused
not only us, but also many bureaucrats at state and district levels who
often assumed that the NPR was simply one of the numerous registrars
empaneled by the UIDAI. Indeed, in the solitary reference the UIDAI’s
2009 working paper makes to the NPR, at the bottom of a section titled
‘Enrolment Strategy in Rural and Urban India’, this is just how it
represents their connection. Reiterating Aadhaar’s ‘pro-rural/pro-poor’
approach to enrolment, the paper names rural registrars – like NREGA,
RSBY and PDS – as ‘government agencies with large rural networks and
significant bases among the poor’, which in the cities would be ‘LIC and
Passports’. To this, in an oh-by-the-way line, it adds that ‘in addition
to these enrollers, the UIDAI will also partner with the Registrar
General of India (RGI) – who will prepare the National Population
Register through the Census 2011 – to reach as many residents as
possible and enroll them into the UID database’, pointing out snootily
that this may ‘require incorporating some additional procedures into the
RGI data collection mechanism, in order to make it UID-ready’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_117]

*Mission creep is revealed as not creep at all, but as integral to the
design*. It becomes a fascinating, if at times chilling, exercise of
historical revisionism to see Aadhaar and the NPR as, far from being
opposed, indeed *planned in unison*, as two halves of the same picture:
one to do with residents, as a populational anonymization, and the other
to work over the same data to create a visibility apparatus for
citizenship that would also weed out the illegal migrants.

The fifth meeting of the EgoM on April 27, 2007 linked the proposed UID
with the Household Survey of Rural Development and the individual state
PDS databases. On June 15, the Planning Commission was asked to set up
the Authority by an executive order. The IT Department was further asked
to ‘work out modalities for linkage with \[the\] Election Commission’,
in addition to firming up the rural development and PDS linkages. That
November, the EgoM agreed on the urgent need to create an ‘identity
related resident database, regardless of whether the database is created
on a *de novo* collection of data or is based on an already existing
data (such as the Election Commission’s Voter List)’, and on the
parallel need to ‘create an institutional mechanism that would ‘own’ the
database’ and be responsible for its maintenance and updating. The next
meeting (for which there is no date mentioned) clearly set up the
separated-at-birth twins: to ‘consider topics relating to collating the
National Population Register (NPR) and UID schemes, *including
methodology, effective implementation techniques, identification of the
institutional mechanism stated above, and the time schedule* for putting
the scheme into operation’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_118]

The die was thus cast. On January 28, 2009, the UIDAI was formed under
the Planning Commission by an executive order. The creep that ensued
was, one may now speculate in hindsight, the main reason for the crisis
of legitimacy that Aadhaar faced: arguably as a direct result of this
design ambivalence, in problems in the ‘collation’ that went beyond
issues of methodology or implementation technique, which began to affect
legitimacy. A 2010 bill to set up a National Identification Authority of
India bit the dust in Parliament, nixed by the Yashwant Sinha-led
Standing Committee on Finance. A second bill failed in 2016 when it was
sought to be smuggled into Parliament as a money bill, and it squeaked
into legality only in 2017 with the epic Supreme Court judgment.

None of this apparently stopped the project from hoovering up, between
2006 and 2012, a growing mountain of big data by an astonishingly
diverse set of both government and private agencies, with the UIDAI very
much its public face. By mid-2013, around the time our Identity Project
came to an end, there was enough evidence of the extent of poison that
had entered Drèze’s metaphorical well. Notwithstanding the UIDAI’s own
strenuous assertion that it has always kept its data confidential – a
requirement that would be enshrined in 2016 under Article 29(1) of the
Aadhaar Act, that ‘no core biometric information, collected or created
under this Act, shall be shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever;
or used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and
authentication’ – news has consistently circulated about the uses to
which its data was being leaked. In February 2013, the Deputy Director
General of the UIDAI, Ashok Dalwai, said that data could be shared with
security agencies, particularly for cases relating to national security,
on the basis of court orders.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_119]

## IV

## 

## We, the Narrative Community: Possibilities of Diffuse Speech

There is, inevitably, another – perhaps
somewhat more subversive – way of telling this story, of what *else*
happened in this very time. I too begin with Ramnath’s point of
departure, but I shall focus on a slightly different aspect of the ‘We
the People’ phrase that has received comparatively little legal
attention, namely the ‘we’ in the *plural*. Conventionally, it is of
course the ‘productive individual’ – or its opposite, the incarcerated
identity-tagged individual – who remains the *par excellence* citizen,
both as exemplary contributor to nation-building and the abstracted
carrier of human rights. Ambedkar, for example, explicitly argued for
why the entire object of fundamental rights and the very purpose of
prescribing the economic structure of society was, says Jayal, to
‘protect the liberty of the individual from invasion by other
individuals’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_120]

What I want to focus on are other less-discussed modes in which
individuated citizenship also occurred. It was produced, if rather
surprisingly, in the *we*-ness of the people – and in the way elements
of the multitude, such as *groups*, *communities* and *collectives,*
could come together to claim citizenship-like rights through *simulating
several of the characteristics of the individual citizen*.

This capacity of collectives to behave like a multi-bodied individual,
extensively discussed in theories of group psychology and politically by
several strands of the Frankfurt School, has triggered, since colonial
times, a major struggle over the meanings that could be attached to
political subjecthood. The tension between the ‘citizen’ and the
‘people’ came through modernity to be manifested as a tug-of-war between
isolatable and identifiable individuation on one side, and diverse
amorphous collectives on the other. A longer historical tension over
where the nation’s imagination lay – whether in discrete individual
subjects capable of incarnating and acting on their rights under
Articles 19 and 21 (and who thus possessed complete control over their
SPD) or in fuzzy social groups and communities – would create in the
early 2000s a brand new digital iteration of a hoary problem of colonial
vintage.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_121] Over the past two decades, this battle over the
dis/embodied subject has also substantially defined the *extent* to
which social rights such as defined by the Directive Principles –
including and especially those of the right to fuzzy or blurred
self-description – were seen as having been enabled (or disabled) by the
link of biometric to basic demographic data.

The question Who is a legal person? has vexed courts in India. We know
that, although a ‘person’ is always an individual, various entities can
have ‘juridical personality’ – including, at different points, animals,
rivers, corporations and even, as recently seen, deities. Such legal
persons are attributed the characteristics of conscious individuals: if
they have a name and a reasonable capacity to say ‘I’, they can be
‘clothed with legal personality’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_122] One might presume therefore that
collectives with individual-like characteristics seeking legal
visibility would have to ‘incorporate’ themselves and become
‘artificial, juristic or fictitious’ persons. If one did, one would
presume incorrectly. And thus emerges another political story because,
for all their newness, the categories Nishant Shah proposes earlier in
this essay – between a ‘data subject’ produced as a blurred entity and a
‘quantified self’ who can be ‘mined for data and information, ranging
from genetic blue-prints to socio-cultural profiles’ – reveal a
considerably longer genesis in the social sciences in India. The
pendular movement between *blurred* and *quantified* individuality is
critically dependent on the degree to which individuation is able to
access, speak for, and mediate communities – as Sudipta Kaviraj shows in
his famous outlining of fuzzy and enumerated communities in his
celebrated 1992 text, ‘The Imaginary Institution of India’.

The arrival of the modern national state, writes Kaviraj, led to the
‘relentless project of enumeration – the endless counting of its
citizens, territories, resources, majorities, minorities, institutions,
activities, import, export, incomes, projects, births, deaths, diseases
\[…\] every conceivable quantifiable thing’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_123] Although Europe may
have managed to make a connection between a rationalist view of society
and a ‘world that is wholly, unsurpassably, classified, enumerated – a
world securely distributed into tables’, India had a slightly different
problem when it encountered rampant enumeration.

On the other hand, although independent India did see the rise of a
‘deeply individualistic language which speaks of atomistic individuals
who enter into relations with each other on the basis of a purely
rational calculation of advantages’, it also saw something else – the
possibility of an ‘easy, intuitive transfer of a language of
*possession* from individuals to the more problematic individuality of
the nation’. It was the individuality of the nation that in turn
disbursed such individuality to diverse entities, and while some of them
were actual, enumerated, human beings, at other times they were also
primordial (unenumerated, fuzzy) communities.

These communities now produced a form of speech that had marked
differences from those of the individual. It was a part of a narrative
mode that ‘does not \[...\] aspire to be a universal form of dis­course
(but) draws lines, distributes people, unlike rational theoretical
discourse which attempts to unite them in an abstract universe of ideal
consensus’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_124] ‘Narratives’, he concludes, ‘are not for all to hear,
for all to participate in to an equal degree’. It is, in short, a very
different form of narrative, violating the founding purpose of
conventional narratives, which is to open meaning out to the world,
comprehensible to all. Narratives aspire, in their very nature, to be
universal. Kaviraj’s narratives are none of those. Just as his ‘fuzzy’
community remains elusive to enumeration, creating significant
challenges to their legal ‘personhood’, so it appears that the
narratives of such a community – ‘not for all to hear’ – create
significant challenges to the concept of speech as defined by the
doctrine of free speech.

I want here to introduce a concept I shall name *diffuse speech* –
speech that does not have an identifiable speaker and an identifiable
listener, but works with a kind of amalgam of the two – that works in
conditions rather different from those imagined in Article 19(1)(a).
Diffuse speech, I propose, is often unable to (or more commonly refuses
to) produce the two conditions that appear essential for 19(1): a person
who could say (i) ‘Yes, I said this, I take responsibility’ and (ii) ‘I
understand the consequences’. Diffuse speech is neither: it is speech
without an identifiable speaking source whose sole purpose is to define
a fuzzy community.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_125]

If diffuse speech does not have an ‘I-said-this’ speaker, it also does
not have a conventional speech recipient whose main purpose is to merely
receive. Recipients of free speech are, within the doctrinal limitations
of the right, primarily those who possess the right to information, a
necessary condition to make informed choices or to participate
intelligently in the democratic process. A well-known legal dissertation
on free speech argues that speech-recipients and audiences are the
*primary object* of free speech concern. Their right to information is
the primary right, from which derives the right of speakers to
speak.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_126] Neither
category plays such a role in Kaviraj’s narrative. However, his fuzzy
narrative communities bring in numerous actors (interpreters, decoders,
or carriers, for example), who are – in a form well known to Indian
storytelling traditions – neither purely speakers nor pure listeners but
an amalgam of both: where the generation of speech becomes
indistinguishable from its endorsement and perpetuation.

Kaviraj’s conception
of community was of course a ‘primordial’ one, his context that of
national communities. Narrative, for him, had
only a provisional and temporary use since narratives of the nation had
a strictly curtailed function, for there were things they could do and
things they couldn’t. He therefore outlined their purpose carefully:
narratives were a mode by which to enable communities to reproduce
themselves by telling stories about themselves. They were above all
‘practical things’, ‘interpretations of the world and its history which
issue in a call to change it’; a *transaction*, a *contract* between a
self and an audience.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_127] They were able to speak with eloquence about
freedom, sacrifice and glory, but were typically ‘vague about the more
concrete and contestable questions of distribution, equality, power, the
actual unequal ordering of the past society or of the future one’. For
all its self-avowed boundaries, Kaviraj’s narrative contract may well
have directly anticipated peer-to-peer networks. As we turn to these, we
may also take forward his primary focus, of how specific communities
become a variation, a subset, mirroring the national community
(literally the ‘we’ of the ‘people’) as we now focus on the birth of
virtual communities from the late 90s on.

## ‘Liking’, Personhood, Terrorism

The person*hood* of the legal person was a key concern when the
Information Technology Act was passed in October 2000. New challenges
emerged over how the conscious-individual-citizen paradigm could be
virtually reproduced, and much debate occurred about the legal
acceptability of digital signatures and born-digital documents such as
emails. Inevitably, the problem of virtual identities came up in what
was still quaintly described as ‘cyberspace’, especially blurry alter
egos commonly described as ‘cyborgs’ (ambiguously human and ambiguously
gendered mutant figures on the edges of legality). Internet porn and
cyber deaths dominated debate, Julian Dibbell’s 1993 text ‘A Rape in
Cyberspace, or How an Evil Clown, a Haitian Trickster Spirit, Two
Wizards, and a Cast of Dozens Turned a Database into a Society’[^06AshishRajadhayksha_128]
was still compulsory reading, and the classic cyber controversy of the
time was the notorious 2004 Delhi Public School MMS scandal when
students circulated a video clip that was put up on auction on the
then-popular site Bazee.com.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_129] Inevitably, the IT Act also
individuated its chosen bad guy against whom it was mobilizing the might
of the state. It was the faceless ‘cyber-hacker’ who was declared the
Enemy of the People, and the target of Section 66 of the IT Act was
anyone who caused ‘wrongful loss or damage to the public’ or altered
information in a computer that might ‘diminish its value or
utility’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_130]

A lot of this changed in 2006 when an entirely
new, far more complex and elusive, category of public actor emerged with
the birth of social media: Orkut’s multilingual Indian iteration, on
August 31, literally the day after the seventh of many furious meetings
taking place among the EgoM. Orkut launched a revolution that, by 2010,
had jumped to 83 million internet users overall, 60 percent of whom were
on social media.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_131] Although Orkut led the way it would have a short
shelf life, being replaced within two years on the frontlines by
Facebook.

Three major and foundational events in the epochal month of February
2009 would shape the decade to come. There is little that brings the
three together other than their simultaneity, and the fact that they
were all defined by the emerging threat posed by the shadowy
individual-as-amorphous-public. The first we have discussed: it was the
ceremonial unveiling of the UIDAI’s heavy artillery in the battle over
bodily individuation. A very different kind of event, at a very
different register, occurred as one of the earliest effective uses of
Facebook for subversive community action. In a high-visibility and
stunningly successful campaign against a Hindu right-wing organization’s
targeting of young people celebrating Valentine’s Day, a ‘Consortium of
Pub-Going, Loose and Forward Women’ put out a call to send gifts of pink
knickers to that organization, as a satirical send-up of the khaki
shorts that was the uniform of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
(RSS).[^06AshishRajadhayksha_132] The event was in itself relatively small, but it did
indicate the growing threat of online community action, and does
therefore contextualize the signing off by the President of India, also
that February, of a draconian amendment to the IT Act. That amendment,
numbered 66A, took direct aim at social media when it threatened
imprisonment to anyone sending ‘information that is grossly offensive’
or ‘causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult,
injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will’ via ‘a
computer, computer system, computer resource or communication device
including attachments in text, images, audio, video and any other
electronic record’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_133]

Two years later, in November 2012 following the death of Bal Thackeray,
supreme leader of the right-wing Shiv Sena party of Bombay, when the
Sena organized its ritual *bandh* (a popular/general strike), a young
woman from the town of Palghar named Shaheen Dhadha wrote a Facebook
post. In that post, she wondered whether it was right to close down the
city like this, and whether Thackeray was a martyr of the stature of
Bhagat Singh and Sukhdev. Later that day, another young woman also from
Palghar, Rinu Srinivasan, clicked ‘like’ on Shaheen’s Facebook post.
Shaheen was of course expressing her personal opinion, and was thus
squarely within the ambit of Article 19(1)(a) that is precisely meant to
protect such speech. Rinu on the other hand wasn’t expressing any
opinion other than to endorse Shaheen’s view. The following day,
however, Mumbai Police made no distinction between the two: they
arrested both Shaheen and Rinu under the Section 66A.

Some months earlier, a chemistry professor from Calcutta’s well-known
Jadavpur University named Ambikesh Mahapatra had been arrested for
forwarding to friends, and for uploading to his Facebook account, some
cartoons of Bengal’s Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee that had apparently
referenced Satyajit Ray’s film, *Sonar Kella*. [^06AshishRajadhayksha_134] In his case the
charge wasn’t clear, and he was quickly released and awarded
compensation by the West Bengal Human Rights Commission. The problem was
once again the source of the speech – they weren’t his cartoons, he was
simply forwarding them, he said.

A somewhat more serious and more significant
incident occurred in December 2014, when another man was arrested, also
under 66A. This man, only known by his Twitter handle Shami Witness, was
arrested because he apparently had pro-ISIS views but – and this was his
main crime – also because he had 17,000 followers to whom he was
‘aggregating information’, in the words of Karnataka’s Director General
of Police.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_135] The police came to know of this man only when Britain’s
Channel 4 interviewed him, and although they withheld his identity and
blurred his voice and image, they revealed that he lived in Bangalore,
had the first name of Mehdi and worked in a leading IT company. He could
hardly have done a better job of giving himself away. The next morning, Shami Witness tweeted that he expected to be
arrested any moment, and when the police finally arrived, he apparently
asked them why they took so long.

I wasn’t able to figure out whether he has been released or not, but it
was widely accepted that there was no real legal case against him. There
were nevertheless two curious facts about his situation. One, his
spectacular voluntary ‘coming out’. And, two, an argument that applies
as much to Rinu’s ‘Like’ as to Mahapatra’s forward: whatever his
personal views, Shami Witness had not expressed any of them on Twitter,
but had only confined himself to aggregating and retweeting information
that was already on the internet and thus already in the public domain.
In the Channel 4 interview, Shami Witness vehemently asserted his
position: ‘I haven’t harmed anybody. I haven’t broken any law...I
haven’t raised any war or any violence against the public of India. I
haven’t waged war against any allies of India’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_136]

In 2012, directly inspired by the outrageous arrest of the two women in
Palghar, a 24-year-old second-year student at the Delhi University’s
Faculty of Law named Shreya Singhal challenged the validity of Section
66A in the Supreme Court. Three years later in March 2015 and shortly
after the Shami Witness episode, the Supreme Court acceded to Singhal’s
petition and struck down Section 66A.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_137]

As we look at forwards, memes, and other forms of post-authorial diffuse
speech, we also go into the somewhat wilder zone of power that was also
part of 66A but elusive to the free speech doctrine. Shami Witness’ main
point – and indeed the key allegation of Karnataka Police – was that he
was an aggregator (he had, said the police charge sheet, 35,000 pages
and 122,000 tweets on his account). His defense allows us to reopen the
online equivalent of the transactional-contractual apparatus that was a
key part of Kaviraj’s narrative community, namely an amalgamation of
speaker and recipient into a narrative whose primary purpose, re-quoting
Kaviraj, was to ‘draw lines, distribute people’. Justice Rohinton
Nariman’s judgment on the 2015 Supreme Court case reveals some awareness
of this problem, suggesting that Section 66A raises questions that may
be additional to those of the black-letter interpretation of Article
19(1)(a). In the narrow sense, Nariman has no hesitation in agreeing
with the petitioners, since the ‘reasonable restrictions’ doctrine of
Article 19(2) outlines eight precise categories that might be evoked and
no more, and Section 66A falls outside of those.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_138]

But there was more to this. The astonishing idea that information is
indifferent to content but only defined by the medium of storage makes
sense to many who aren’t only students of Marshall McLuhan. Such a
concept of information is, for example, the source of a commonly held
view of the police that the mere existence of information is sufficient
to read meaning into it and to charge someone with a crime. This
happened in the legal trials of S.A.R. Geelani some years ago as
Shuddhabrata Sengupta has shown us,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_139] and clearly happened again in
the Safoora Zargar instance.

There are further consequences. Content is bred through circulation:
*something becomes so because sufficient numbers of people believe that
it is so*. Ganeshas thus drink milk because enough numbers of people
believe it, and there is (to quote another Supreme Court judgment in a
rather different case) ‘*no dispute before this Court \[…\] that the
birth of Lord Ram is ascribed to have taken place at Ayodhya*, as
described in Valmiki’s Ramayan. (The only thing) being disputed is
whether the \[…\] site below the central dome of the Babri Masjid is the
place of birth of Lord Ram’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_140]

But there would be another way to tell even this story, as the 2000s
went on. The further possibility of
nonuniversal narratives generating communities through purely horizontal
circulation – that there is no content prior to, or following, the
disseminative act – would enable Shami Witness, along with numerous
other models of communication, from pornography to fan address, to state
his case. It would also enable an entirely new career for ‘the people’
generating new kinds of nonuniversal narrative communities. Such
communities may well need a reinvoking of the Directive Principles as
they take the meaning of citizenship to its liminal extremes.

## V

## 

## Zones of Occupation 

On August 4, 2019 (less than a year before the time of writing and four
months before Shaheen Bagh, when Article 370 of the Constitution was
abrogated by the Parliament of India, a total internet shutdown was
imposed on the state of Kashmir as a ‘preventive measure’. Between
January 2012 and March 2020, India recorded 385 internet shutdowns, the
largest number imposed by any country. Of these, 237 were preventive,
imposed in anticipation of law-and-order problems. Kashmir was the
longest, lasting over 213 days, and also the most lethal.

By 2019, India also led the world in the number of official takedown
requests made to Facebook, Twitter, Google, Microsoft and Wikimedia,
nearly all of them directed at Facebook alone (70,815 out of the total
of 77,620 requests).[^06AshishRajadhayksha_141] There are of course similarities between
takedown requests and shutdowns in that both deny access rights, but
there are some crucial differences. In the instance of takedown
requests, it has been easier to apply the freedom of speech doctrine and
to apply Article 19(1)(a), as has been asserted in at least four
judgments so far.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_142] Shutdowns, on the other hand, *include* but also
*exceed* the free speech doctrine with an additional spatialization
aspect, when regions, districts or at times entire states, and not just
specific individuals, are informationally blanked out. One consequence
is a spillover of the right to speech into the right to *access space*,
to peacefully assemble in it, or to travel through it, as Article
19(1)(a) now comes alongside Section 144 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (CrPC). Shutdowns thus appear to force diffuse speech into
diffuse space. Analogue in the time of curfew forces a return also to
the underground and subterranean, to movement through alleys and
by-lanes rather than known highways, alongside longer histories of
occupation.

In September 2015, wireless internet and voice services shut down for a
week without public notification in the district of Churachandpur in
Manipur, following protests by Kuki groups opposing the introduction of
Inner Line Permits. The protests led to arson and violent clashes,
apparently in part as a result of the shutdowns, and nine people died in
police firing. In an astonishing display of physical occupation, for an
entire year the bodies of the nine dead were kept on public display in
mauve coffins under a shamiana, in front of which daily speeches
occurred under a sign that said ‘Hills & Valley as separate entities:
the new normal, learn to live with it’. Apparently, a poster pinned on
the wall of Churachandpur police station outside which three of the nine
were killed still remains there.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_143]

Physical occupation took a new turn in the months that followed August
2019, when the official curfew shaded into a people’s *hartal*.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_144] It
was more than a ban in Kashmir: it was, says journalist Anuradha Bhasin,
editor of the newspaper *Kashmir Times*, a ‘communication blockade’ that
even in Kashmir was without precedent. The government did not make the
shutdown orders public, leaving people in the dark not only as to what
was happening but under which legal statute. ‘Kashmiris are not new to
curfews’, says Bhasin in an interview with *Frontline*,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_145] but the
scale of the shutdown was such that ‘a kind of civil disobedience’ has
set in, as ‘people have dug their heels in’.

When *Kashmir Times* found itself unable to publish its Srinagar edition
after August 6, Bhasin moved court. At that time this was a
straightforward freedom of speech issue. All she wanted was to publish
her paper. This however couldn’t happen unless there was ‘free and safe
movement of reporters and journalists and other media personnel \[…\] to
report and publish news’, which also included the right to unfettered
movement. Which meant that when the Supreme Court finally came up with
its judgment on *Anuradha Bhasin* v *Union of India* in January 2020,
the legal aspects of internet shutdowns proved rather messier.

The judgment moved around between Articles 19(1)(a) and (g), the
Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services Rules of 2017 (TSTS) (adapting
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885), and Section 144 of the CrPC prohibiting
public assembly. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta ‘vehemently opposed
selective access to internet services’ claiming that the government
didn’t have the technology, for which he was rapped on the knuckle by
the Court, saying that ‘if such a contention is accepted, the Government
would have a free pass to put a complete internet blockage every
time’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_146] Perhaps the most far-out instance of technological
unilateralism was the Solicitor General’s argument that, since orders
for Section 144 had never been published, they ‘could not be accorded
the force of law’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_147] He was once more chastised and informed that
‘the necessity of publication of law is a part of the rule of natural
justice’. Then came the question of freedom of speech, and things got
even more bizarre. The judgment pointed out that since ‘none of the
counsels have argued for declaring the right to access the internet as a
fundamental right’, it was deliberately ‘not expressing any view on the
same’, but confining itself to ‘declaring that the right to freedom of
speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a), and the right to carry on
any trade or business under 19(1)(g) \[…\] is constitutionally
protected’. When it specifically underlined the right to a free press
under this doctrine – which was Anuradha Bhasin’s primary reason to go
to court – Mehta argued this time that ‘the jurisprudence on free speech
relating to newspapers cannot be applied to the internet’ since
‘newspapers only allowed one-­way communication’ whereas ‘the internet
makes two-­way communication’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_148]

Expressing frustration at the moving goalposts, the judgment noted that
‘law and technology seldom mix like oil and water \[…\] there is a
consistent criticism that the development of technology is not met by
equivalent movement in the law’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_149] In this case the problem was that
‘morning to night we are encapsulated within the cyberspace and our most
basic activities are enabled by the use of internet’. In trying to bring
down the scale and extent of the legal sledgehammer on display into
something justiciable, the court ruled: (1) ‘freedom of speech and
expression and the freedom to practice any profession or carry on any
trade, business or occupation over the medium of internet enjoys
constitutional protection’;[^06AshishRajadhayksha_150] (2) on the TSTS Rules, that any order
‘suspending internet services indefinitely is impermissible’;[^06AshishRajadhayksha_151] and
(3) on Section 144, that the ‘power under Section 144 \[…\] cannot be
used to suppress legitimate expression of opinion or grievance or
exercise of any democratic rights’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_152] As a result of the judgment,
some kind of spotty internet was made available to the troubled state.
Medianama lists out what was achieved: only 2G connectivity and only in
selected districts; 400 kiosks; wired broadband only to companies
providing software services and only after Mac-binding. All social media
websites, peer-to-peer apps and VPNs were explicitly prohibited.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_153]

And then, in a brief aside that nobody seems to have quite discussed,
the judgment brought up what may well have been the true purpose of the
plethora of unpublished Rules and Acts the government was bringing to
bear. Its purpose, said the Court, was to produce a ‘chilling effect’, a
category that had not yet been adequately explored in Indian law.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_154]
The basic principle of a chilling effect was to restrict a person from
exercising his protected right ‘due to the ambiguous nature of an
overbroad statute’. Even though the state may perform a constitutional
action, if the ‘panopticon concerns’ and the ‘comparative harm’
potentially caused by ‘impugned restrictions due to their broad­-based
nature’ was not tempered judicially, its eventual effect would become a
‘self­-proclaiming instrument’ causing a ‘great burden on free speech’.

‘What will happen when the lid is off?’, wonders Anuradha Bhasin. In an
astonishing counterresponse to the shutdown, she says, the people had
apparently decided to ‘refuse to allow the Indian government to show
‘normalcy’’. Protesting against government claims that there was ‘no
curfew or restrictions in Kashmir’, says a PUCL report, people
‘convert(ed) the state-initiated curfew to lock down the valley (into) a
people’s *hartal* as a spontaneous act to register their protest and
resistance’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_155]

Diffuse speech now becomes an amalgam of speech with assembly. This long
history of a connection has often been lost to the excessive
*individuation* of the free-speaking ‘person’, but its reintroduction of
public space – a direct, if unintended, consequence of shutdowns – also
apparently recalled longer histories, as they returned people to the
very origins of the theory of the public sphere.

Manuel Castells points out how an amorphous iteration of the old public
sphere worked when he discusses the first-ever internet shutdown the
world had seen: the week-long 2011 blackout across Cairo amid the Tahrir
Square protests. A new kind of ‘networked’ public space amalgamated the
internet, the mobile phone, ‘pre-existing social networks, street
demonstrations, occupations of public squares and Friday gatherings
around the mosques’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_156] Its primary purpose was to ‘*create
community* to overcome fear’:[^06AshishRajadhayksha_157] fear here generated primarily by
network failure. One direct consequence was the resolute return to
analogue spaces, to physical contact, and to the many ancestors of
networked communication, including ‘rumours, sermons, pamphlets, and
manifestos, spread from person to person, from the pulpit, from the
press, or by whatever means of communication were available’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_158]

Moving from Tahrir Square to the *Indignados* in Spain,[^06AshishRajadhayksha_159] Castells
points to another feature of the rebirth of networked communities: their
assertion of leaderlessness. ‘There was no formal decision, but
everybody agreed in practice \[…\] there would be no leaders, either
locally or nationally. Not even spokespersons were recognized’.

> The source of this ancient, anarchist principle, usually betrayed in
> history, was not ideological in the case of this movement, although it
> became a fundamental principle, enforced by the large majority of the
> movement’s actors. It was present in the experience of Internet
> networks in which horizontality is the norm, and there is little need
> for leadership because the coordination functions can be exercised by
> the network itself through interaction between its nodes.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_160]

From roughly 2014, India saw numerous protest movements following the
principle known worldwide now as *horizontalism* (or *horizontalidad*,
the term coined in Argentina in 2001). The principle’s emphasis is on
leaderlessness – the primary condition of diffuse speech – and on
occupation, both *analogue* and *offline*. All of these movements can
directly and straightforwardly be viewed as a protest against digital
identity. They are at once protests against
the technological unilateralism of the state, a reappropriation of the
physical manifestation of the abstracted ‘people’ as well as a popular
re-concretization of the body that – like the corpses on public display
for a year in Churachandpur – collectively add up to become also a bid
to retake popular sovereignty.

## Zones of Mediatized Control

Between 2014 and 2019, these movements took place most prominently on
university campuses, where an actual, physical, analogue space existed
that literally stood for freedom, as JNU’s now-famous Freedom Square
epitomized. In 2019, they spilled out into the streets and into the
several occupy initiatives often led by women. Although these were not,
or not only, Kaviraj’s primordial communities, they included several
features of his fuzzy and nonuniversal narratives, *possessing its one
key feature, namely their antagonism to individuated identity*.

Several of their strategies of returning to analogue, both as identity
and as space, occur in the context of extreme mediatization, and with it
of extreme identification and surveillance practices. G. Arunima, who
teaches at JNU, names ‘at least three kinds of camera forms that
proliferate in universities \[…\] CCTVs, photos and videos taken by
security personnel or the administration, those taken by students, and
finally a proposal that classrooms could have cameras to facilitate MOOC
(Massive Open Online Course) courses’.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_161] In addition to these,
campuses are ‘awash with cameras and users… Needless to say, the
proliferation of cameras and users has democratised photography in the
last decade in a manner that may have been unthinkable earlier’.

What it has also led to, says Arunima, is the production of students’
visual counter-archive as part of what she calls ‘resistance
aesthetics’. Such an aesthetics is ‘enmeshed within cultural modes and
histories of protests and prior histories of opposing institutional
authority’, and is often resolutely analogue.

> \[It\] would bring together protests, speeches, marches, fasts,
> dharnas (sit-ins), and other forms of visual resistance, such as
> cartoons and posters, all of which are designed to counter
> administrative authority. Since now many campus protests, following
> administrative orders, are routinely videographed by security staff,
> the archive of resistance is also an attempt by student protestors to
> maintain their own visual record of the events. This counter-archive,
> I would suggest, should be read more like \[…\] an ethical mode of
> witnessing, rather than as connected only to the ‘objectivity’ of the
> mechanical eye.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_162]

## Revisiting Technological Unilateralism in the Era of Aarogya Setu

> ‘Today identity is embedded with vertical solutions and often
> conflated with entitlement.’
>
> – Pramod K. Verma, technology developer and former Chief Technology
> Officer, Aadhaar[^06AshishRajadhayksha_163]

By the middle of 2020, as the first wave of pandemic lockdowns came to
an end, the ‘chilling effect’ of various techno-legal initiatives had
become very much a reality. Even as COVID-19 positive cases escalated –
even as Mumbai alone exceeded all of China in the number of cases – the
regulatory impulses of the state grew. In Karnataka, the Seva Sindhu
portal sought to integrate all of the state’s Common Service Centres,
and made registration compulsory to enter the state. It was not alone:
by this time, most states had their equivalent border controls. Aarogya
Setu itself, originally set up specifically to fight COVID-19, grew in
the time it took to write this essay into a platform that would
integrate telemedicine video consultations, an essential building block
for India’s National Health Stack. This Health Stack on its side
proposed to build on the legacy of India Stack – a series of API-based
collaborations permitting Aadhaar verification platforms, an E-KYC
mechanism, Unified Payments Interface, a Digilocker, and much else.

It was astonishing to see the Aadhaar template being reprised. Aadhaar
was a Planning Commission project, Aarogya Setu a Niti Aayog initiative.
The first was a lean-and-mean identity provider and authenticator, the
second merely a COVID-19 contact-tracing app. Both were voluntary except
you could do practically nothing without either. Both became effectively
gateways into a complex network of services: Aadhaar into the Unified
Payments area and Aarogya Setu into the health economy.

What did perhaps change was the absence of any sense of optimism beneath
the high-pressure sales talk flooding iSPIRT’s many websites. In their
presentation on the further integration of the National Health Stack
with Aarogya Setu, the two project leaders, Arnab Kumar, Program
Director of Frontier Technologies at NITI Aayog, Jay Dutta, Senior Vice
President at MakeMyTrip.com, and a private volunteer who developed the
app[^06AshishRajadhayksha_164] spoke of this as an opportunity that they had ‘stumbled upon’,
a possible initial building block that could – ‘if people are
interested’ – survive beyond COVID-19. As with Aadhaar, here too there
appeared to be little regulation available, given that the Personal Data
Protection Bill, 2019 was yet to be passed into law.[^06AshishRajadhayksha_165]

The chill then really lies in the unknown, as we anticipate the possible
future of what this essay has tried to track: namely the sovereign body
in its troubled interaction with the changing historical definitions of
citizenship. As the ‘people’ become state property, as ownership becomes
a direct manifestation of the data it controls, the right to access
their data has become considerably more complicated than simply a right
to free speech extending to the internet: it extends into the right to
life, and the right to analogue spaces.

Contrary to the assertive, aspirational ‘coming out’ that is central to
Digital India’s self-image, much recent politics is defined by its very
opposite: of making identifiable speaking voices elusive, making spaces
ephemeral, defining a fuzzy leaderlessness to political self-assertion.
Such elusiveness in turn contextualizes the overly visible incarceration
process with which the state has shown off the example of Safoora Zargar
and the several young people arrested under the UAPA. Together with the
heavy-handed assertion that identity is only what the state provides,
such overt displays of control in pandemic times only open up the long
colonial ancestry in the assertion, central to sovereign states, that a
body has only one identity with no choice in the matter.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_1]: The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 or CAA was passed on
    December 11, 2019, amending the Citizenship Act, 1955 with a focus
    on religious ‘minorities’ from India’s neighboring states,
    explicitly excluding Muslims. Although there have been several
    earlier amendments to the original Act (in 1992, 2003, 2005, and
    2015), this was the first time that religion was specifically
    mentioned as a criterion for citizenship. The earlier December 2003
    amendment had introduced the concept of illegal immigrants, thereby
    also reversing a basic principle of citizenship, namely the right to
    the soil as against inheritance and descent. The 2003 amendment also
    introduced the controversial National Register of Citizens (NRC),
    implemented in practice only in Assam.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_2]: Shaheen Bagh is best known among a series of protests that broke
    out after the 2019 amendment to the Citizenship Act, 1955. It was a
    peaceful sit-in organized primarily by women in northeast Delhi
    between December 15, 2019 and March 24, 2020 when, after the
    COVID-19 lockdown was announced on March 23, police had dispersed
    the gathering.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_3]: On March 20, 2020, even before the National Disaster Management
    Authority (NDMA) emergency Order was declared, the Ministry of
    Electronics & Information Technology (MEITY) had issued its own
    ‘advisory’: to ‘curb false news/misinformation on corona virus’ it
    would invoke the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines)
    Rules 2011 to initiate ‘awareness \[…\] of authentic information’
    along with ‘immediate action to disable/remove such content’ hosted
    on social media platforms. See Advisory to Curb False News /
    Misinformation on Corona Virus issued to ‘All Social Media
    Platforms’ by MEITY, dated March 20, 2020.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_4]: Suhrith Parthasarthy, Gautam Bhatia, and
    Apar Gupta, ‘Privacy Concerns During a Pandemic’, *The Hindu*, 29
    April 2020,
    https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/privacy-concerns-during-a-pandemic/article31456602.ece.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_5]: See Sections 2(i) and 2(ii),
    https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1470/1/a1967-37.pdf.
    The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act was originally passed in
    1967 and repeatedly amended, mainly defining terrorism, who
    terrorists are, and what the ‘security and integrity of India’ is.
    It was replaced by the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) in 2002,
    but in 2004 it incorporated most of POTA’s language. The July 2019
    amendment was to enable the state to impose draconian preventive
    detention measures to enable people to be jailed without trial, and
    also to designate individuals, as against groups, as ‘terrorist’.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_6]: Bhima-Koregaon refers to an event in colonial India when, on
    January 1, 1818, a Mahar regiment of the East India Company defeated
    the Peshwa Bajirao II. The event is commemorated annually by
    Maharashtra’s Dalit community since Dr. B.R. Ambedkar led a
    commemoration ceremony in 1927. In late December 2017, a political
    event was organized in Pune’s Shaniwar Wada mainly by Dalit Bahujan
    groups. On January 1, 2018, the 200th anniversary of the original
    event, Dalits were attacked by some local right-wing groups
    protesting the celebration and they retaliated with roadblocks and a
    call for a statewide *bandh* (general strike). Over several months
    thereafter, many prominent lawyers, activists, and academics have
    been targeted by the police under the UAPA and jailed without trial.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_7]: Gautam Navlakha, ‘‘My Hope Rests on a
    Speedy and Fair Trial': Gautam Navlakha Before His Surrender’, *The
    Wire*, 14 April 2020,
    https://thewire.in/rights/gautam-navlakha-bhima-koregaon-nia-surrender.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_8]: Sruthisagar Yamunan and Shoaib Daniyal,
    ‘As Delhi Police Crack Down on Student Leaders, Courts Cite Lockdown
    to Justify Lack of Scrutiny’, *Scroll*, 29 April 2020,
    <https://scroll.in/article/960591/as-delhi-police-crack-down-on-student-leaders-court-cites-lockdown-to-justify-lack-of-scrutiny>.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_9]: Safoora Zargar was eventually granted bail on June 24, 2020, after
    spending four months in jail.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_10]: @DelhiPolice, ‘Important Information’, Twitter post, 20 April
    2020, 10:38 AM,
    https://twitter.com/DelhiPolice/status/1252101893628796933.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_11]: Niraja Gopal Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents: An Indian
    History*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013, pp. 84–85.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_12]: The crucial amendments were the introduction of the ‘illegal
    migrant’ in section 2(i)(b) and the new requirement in Section
    3(i)(c) that ‘both \[…\] parents are citizens of India’ or ‘one
    \[…\] parent is a citizen and the other is not an illegal migrant’.
    See
    https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/4210/1/Citizenship\_Act\_1955.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_13]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 14.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_14]: Jayal writes, ‘Social and economic rights everywhere—including in
    India—remain poor cousins of civil and political rights. This
    hierarchy of rights—civil and political on top, social and economic
    below—appears invincible, though it continues to be frequently
    attacked. However, the very fact that the grammar of rights is being
    constantly reinvented through struggle is in itself a testimony to
    the power of an idea of citizenship in which the core mainstream
    rights—civil and political—are simultaneously the weapons of
    achieving the rights on the margins and of the marginal populations,
    as well as the object or that which is sought to be undermined’. See
    Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 162.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_15]: Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
    Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (henceforth Aadhaar Act), Section
    2f, defines benefit ‘as any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or
    payment. in cash or kind, provided to an individual or a group of
    individuals and includes such other benefits as may be notified by
    the Central Government’. For details, see
    https://uidai.gov.in/images/targeted\_delivery\_of\_financial\_and\_other\_subsidies\_benefits\_and\_services\_13072016.pdf

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_16]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 19.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_17]: See Committee of Experts under the
    Chairmanship of Justice B.N. Srikrishna, *A Free and Fair Digital
    Economy: Protecting Privacy, Empowering Indians*, Ministry of
    Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India,
    2018, Chapter 1, Section C.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_18]: An early pitch by Aadhaar was to use the UID number as a Facebook
    identity.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_19]: Nishant Shah’s essay in this volume discusses Free Basics in some
    detail.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_20]: China’s Health Code was introduced in February 2020 as an
    e-passport reporting real-time health conditions in which
    applicants, after providing information such as travel history,
    residence, and medical records, receive a QR code that identifies
    their risk level as red, yellow, or green. Alipay and WeChat are
    among other agencies of the provincial government that receive
    personal data and issue health codes.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_21]: ‘Notification of the Aarogya Setu Data Access and Knowledge
    Sharing Protocol, 2020 in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic’, Ministry
    of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, 11
    May 2020, Section 8 (‘Principles for sharing of response data for
    research purposes’),
    https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Aarogya\_Setu\_data\_access\_knowledge\_Protocol.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_22]: Rahul Matthan, ‘The Privacy Features
    That Are Built into Arogya Setu’, *The Mint*, 8 April 2020,
    <https://epaper.livemint.com/Home/ShareArticle?OrgId=b5a81ef7>.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_23]: Hemal Ashar, ‘Woman With No Travel
    History, No Symptoms, Whisked Away by BMC’, *Mid-day*, 18 April
    2020,
    https://www.mid-day.com/articles/coronavirus-outbreak-woman-with-no-travel-history-no-symptoms-whisked-away-by-bmc/22737204.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_24]: Suraksha Store, https://www.surakshastore.com/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_25]: An Aarogya Setu Tracker, set up by the Internet Democracy
    Project, has listed some 45 agencies who made this app mandatory or
    required people who have it to behave in a certain way (for example,
    curfew violators being forced to download the app or Resident
    Welfare Associations refusing entry without the app and a ‘health
    certificate’). See Tanisha Ranjit, ‘When
    and Where is Aarogya Setu Mandatory? We’re Keeping Track’, Internet
    Democracy Project, 8 May 2020,
    https://internetdemocracy.in/2020/05/aarogya-setu-tracker/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_26]: Office memorandum issued by Ministry of Personnel, Public
    Grievances and Pensions, 29 April 2020,
    https://www.scconline.com/blog/post/2020/04/29/central-government-employees-asked-to-download-aarogyasetu-app-on-their-mobile-phones-immediately/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_27]: Prasid Banerjee and Shreya Nandy,
    ‘Govt’s Arogya Setu App to be Installed on Smartphones by Default
    Soon’, *The Mint*, 29 April 2020,
    https://www.livemint.com/technology/apps/govt-s-aarogya-setu-app-to-be-installed-on-smartphones-by-default-soon-11588170539557.html.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_28]: After Delhi Metro Opens, You May be
    Denied Ride Without Mask, Arogya Setu Pass’, *The Mint*, 23 April
    2020, https://www.livemint.com/news/india/after-delhi-metro-opens-you-may-be-denied-ride-without-mask-aarogya-setu-pass-11587649373682.html.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_29]: Ivan Mehta, ‘India Wants to Build an Ultra-intrusive ‘Wristband’ to Track Coronavirus Patients’ Every Move’, *TNW News*, 22 April 2020, 

    https://thenextweb.com/in/2020/04/22/india-wants-to-build-an-ultra-intrusive-wristband-to-track-coronavirus-patients-every-move/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_30]: Subhashis Banerjee, ‘Covid Surveillance
    and Privacy in India’, Internet Freedom Foundation, 1 May 2020,
    https://forum.internetfreedom.in/t/webinar-covid-surveillance-and-privacy-in-india-may-01-2020-5-50-pm/440.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_31]: Memo issued by Rashtrapati Bhavan for the ‘Constitution of
    Committee for Developing and Implementing a Citizen App Technology
    Platform for Combating Covid-19’, dated 3 April 2020.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_32]: As per the Aadhaar Act, Section 2(v), an Aadhaar number can be
    issued to a resident who has been residing in India for at least 182
    days in the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application
    for enrolment.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_33]: Section 2(k) of the Aadhaar Act.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_34]: UIDAI, *UIDAI Strategy Overview:*
    *Creating a Unique Identity Number for Every Resident in India*,
    Planning Commission/UIDAI, Government of India, April 2010.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_35]: Nandan Nilekani, *Imagining India:
    Ideas for the New Century*, New Delhi: Penguin, 2008, p. 122.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_36]: Partha Chatterjee, ‘Beyond the Nation?
    Or Within?’, *Social Text* 56 (1998): 57–69.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_37]: Nilekani, *Imagining India*, p. 373.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_38]: The Last Mile Problem is used in supply chain management as the
    hardest, most expensive, and time-consuming part of the supply chain
    process, amounting up to 53 percent of the total cost of shipping.
    It has however taken on an entirely new set of local inflections,
    involving battles between the state and the market on who can bridge
    this last mile better, or what it means. See Ashish Rajadhyaksha,
    *The Last Cultural Mile: An Inquiry into Technology and Governance
    in India*, Bangalore: Centre for Internet &
    Society/Researchers@Work, 2011.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_39]: Amartya Sen, ‘Markets, State and Social Opportunity’, in Amartya
    Sen, *Development as Freedom*, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2000, pp.
    126–128.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_40]: Sen, ‘Markets’, p. 135.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_41]: NAMEDIA, *A Vision for Indian Television*, New Delhi: Media Foundation of the Non-aligned, 1986.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_42]: A.S. Bhalla, ‘Can High Technology Help
    Third World ‘Take-Off’?’, *Economic & Political Weekly* 22.27
    (1987): 1082–1086.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_43]: For example, by Arun Mohan Sukumar in his much-discussed book
    *Midnight’s Machines: A Political History of Technology in India*,
    New Delhi: Penguin Viking, 2019.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_44]: Nilekani, *Imagining India*, p. 274.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_45]: The agencies included government ministries with development
    schemes for the poor, such as the Ministry of Rural Development’s
    Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS),
    the Ministry of Labour and Employment’s Rashtriya Swasthya Bima
    Yojana (RSBY), the Department of Food and Public Distribution’s
    Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS); Life Insurance
    Corporation of India and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas;
    banks and other financial institutions offering outreach through
    banking correspondents; and service-oriented agencies such as mobile
    phone companies.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_46]: Sen, ‘Markets’, p. 120.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_47]: Nilekani, *Imagining India*, p. 365.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_48]: All Aadhaar registrars were permitted to ask for additional
    information for their own purposes – also known as KYR+. To take one
    instance, that of Andhra Pradesh (AP), KYR+ included information
    regarding caste membership, NREGS job card no., SHG no., pension
    card no., bank account details, LPG connections, etc. Typically,
    KYR+ forms contained some mandatory fields and some non-mandatory
    fields. However, from what The Identity Project witnessed at the
    enrollment centers, residents did not seem to distinguish between
    the two, nor were they appropriately advised at the Enrollment
    Centre. So, while UIDAI-mandated Enrollment Forms asked residents to
    volunteer their bank details, in the AP KYR+, residents were asked
    to furnish their bank account details without any discernible
    distinction between it being a mandatory or a voluntary field.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_49]: The NeGP, launched in May 2006, was a ‘mission mode’ plan to
    bring into a single system all government services available to the
    citizens of India via electronic media. It initially comprised 27
    ‘Mission Mode Projects’ (MMPs). It was a long-term ancestor to the
    present Digital India and UMANG (Unified Mobile Application for
    New-age Governance) initiatives.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_50]: Jean
    Drèze, ‘Unique Facility, or Recipe for
    Trouble?’, *The Hindu*, 25 November 2010,
    <https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/Unique-facility-or-recipe-for-trouble/article15714630.ece>.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_51]: Bharat Bhatti, Jean Drèze, and Reetika
    Khera, ‘Experiments with Aadhar’, *The Hindu*, 27 June 2012,
    https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/Experiments-with-Aadhaar/article12916184.ece.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_52]: Drèze, ‘Unique Facility’.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_53]: All references to the NPR taken from the Census of India’s FAQs:
    https://censusindia.gov.in/2011-common/faqs.html. This particular
    FAQ, outlining the social audit, is no longer on the Census website.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_54]: See ‘Nandan Nilekani, Home Ministry End
    UIDAI Tiff, to Divide Data Collection’, *The Economic Times*, 28
    January 2012,
    https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/nandan-nilekani-home-ministry-end-uidai-tiff-to-divide-data-collection/articleshow/11655516.cms?utm\_source=contentofinterest&utm\_medium=text&utm\_campaign=cppst

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_55]: R. Swaminathan, ‘UIDAI-NPR Row: Identity Politics of a Different Kind’, Observer Research Foundation, 7 April 2012,

    https://www.orfonline.org/research/uidai-npr-row-identity-politics-of-a-different-kind/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_56]: The plan, according to newspaper reports, was that from May 2011,
    the National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) would integrate 21 existing
    databases with central and state government agencies and other
    organizations in the public and private sector such as banks,
    insurance companies, stock exchanges, airlines, railways, telecom
    service providers, chemical vendors, etc. Eleven government agencies
    (including, among others, the Research and Analysis Wing or RAW,
    Intelligence Bureau, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, and Income
    Tax Department) would be able to access sensitive personal
    information of any individual, such as bank accounts, insurance
    policies, property owned or rented, travel, income tax returns,
    driving records, automobiles owned or leased, credit card
    transactions, stock market trades, phone calls, emails and SMSes,
    websites visited, etc. A National Population Registry would be
    established by the 2011 Census, during which fingerprints and iris
    scans would be taken along with GPS records of each household.
    According to the home ministry, the central intelligence agencies
    and state police have plenty of information that is not shared or
    because there is no umbrella organization to collate all the
    information, which any or all the agencies can share to generate
    real-time intelligence. The NATGRID enables quick extraction of
    information, data mining, pattern recognition and flagging
    ‘tripwires’ of suspicious or unusual activities (Brijesh Pandey,
    ‘Natgrid Will Kick in from May 2011. Is the Big Brother Threat for
    Real?’, *Tehelka*, 13 November 2010). Also see, Usha Ramanathan, ‘A
    State of Surveillance’, International Environmental Law Research
    Centre, 2010, http://www.ielrc.org/content/w1002.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_57]: Akshay Deshmane, ‘The Dalit Identity Dilemma’, *Frontline*, 28
    April 2017,

    <https://frontline.thehindu.com/cover-story/the-dalit-identity-dilemma/article9629313.ece>.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_58]: Deshmane, ‘The Dalit Identity’.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_59]: Pankul Sharma, ‘Only Male or Female Can Get PAN Card,
    Transgenders Told’, *Times of India*, 15 March 2018,\
    http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/63321785.cms?utm\_source=contentofinterest&utm\_medium=text&utm\_campaign=cppst.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_60]: Supreme Court of India, *Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (retd) and
    Another* v *Union of India and Others*, WP (C) 494/2012 (2018). For
    details see
    https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2012/35071/35071\_2012\_Judgement\_26-Sep-2018.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_61]: Gautam Bhatia, ‘The Aadhaar Judgment: A Dissent for the Ages’,
    *Indian Constitutional Law and Philosophy*, 27 September 2018,
    https://indconlawphil.wordpress.com/2018/09/27/the-aadhaar-judgment-a-dissent-for-the-ages/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_62]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, Dissenting judgment. Part H,
    Proportionality: 247.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_63]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, Dissenting judgment. Part L, Conclusion:
    14m.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_64]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, 2018. Dissenting judgment. Part H,
    Proportionality: 246.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_65]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, 2018. Dissenting judgment. Part H,
    Proportionality: 247. Emphasis is mine.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_66]: Nishant Shah, ‘Identity and Identification: The Individual in the
    Time of Networked Governance’, *Socio-Legal Review* 11.12 (2015): p.
    28.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_67]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 24.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_68]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 26.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_69]: Subash Jain, ‘Man Arrested for Getting Aadhaar Card for Dog’,
    *Hindustan Times*, 3 July 2015,
    https://www.hindustantimes.com/india/man-arrested-for-getting-aadhaar-card-for-dog/story-MVtobqWtsrLXm01OkCBSvK.html.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_70]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 36.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_71]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', pp. 33–34.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_72]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 27.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_73]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 38.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_74]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 38.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_75]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 31.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_76]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 38.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_77]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 30.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_78]: Shah, ‘Identity and Identification', p. 27.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_79]: Partha Chatterjee, *A Princely Impostor?: The Kumar of Bhawal and
    the Secret History of Indian Nationalism*, Princeton, N.J.:
    Princeton University Press, 2002.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_80]: In 2001, the government of West Bengal officially changed the
    name of the city to Kolkata.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_81]: Chatterjee, *A Princely Impostor?*, p. 126.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_82]: Sukumar, *Midnight’s Machines*, pp. 114–115.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_83]: Ashis Nandy, ‘Coming Home: Religion, Mass Violence and the Exiled and Secret Selves of a Citizen-Killer’, in Ashis Nandy, *Regimes of Narcissism, Regimes of Despair*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2013, p. 65.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_84]: Chatterjee, *A Princely Impostor?*, p. 366.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_85]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*. Dissenting judgment. No. 45. Emphasis is
    mine.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_86]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*. Dissenting judgment. Part G3: Identity and
    Identification, No. 185.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_87]:Giorgio
    Agamben, *Homo Sacer*: *Sovereign Power and Bare Life*, Stanford:
    Stanford University Press, 1998.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_88]: See Memorandum of Understanding between the UIDAI and the
    National Coalition of Organisations for Security of Migrant Workers
    (represented by Aajeevika Bureau), executed on 29 July 2010, to
    avert crises precisely such as this one. For details, see
    https://uidai.gov.in/images/mou/partners/Coalition\_of\_Migrant\_Workers\_NGOs.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_89]: See Jawhar Sircar, ‘A Long Look at Exactly Why and How India Failed its Migrant Workers’, *The Wire*, 29 May 2020, <https://thewire.in/labour/lockdown-migrant-workers-policy-analysis>.  

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_90]: Saadat Hasan Manto’s classic 1955 short story ‘Toba Tek Singh’,
    in which the newly formed governments of India and Pakistan exchange
    some Muslim, Sikh and Hindu lunatics, revolves around Bishan Singh,
    a Sikh inmate of an asylum in Lahore, sent under police escort to
    India, who eventually finds himself in the no man's land between two
    barbed wire fences.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_91]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 151.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_92]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 166.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_93]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 174.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_94]: The prevalence of ‘hunger amidst plenty’ in India took a new turn
    in mid 2001, as the country's food stocks reached unprecedented
    levels while hunger intensified in drought-affected areas and
    elsewhere. This situation prompted the People’s Union for Civil
    Liberties (Rajasthan) to approach the Supreme Court with a writ
    petition on the ‘right to food’. Initially, the case was brought
    against the Government of India, the Food Corporation of India
    (FCI), and six state governments, in the specific context of
    inadequate drought relief. Subsequently, the case was extended to
    the larger issue of chronic hunger, with all states and union
    territories as respondents.\
    The legal basis of the petition is simple. Article 21 of the
    Constitution is a guarantee of the right to life, and imposes upon
    the state the duty to protect it. This right is fundamental. The
    Supreme Court has held in previous cases that the right to life
    includes the right to live with dignity and all that goes along with
    it, including the right to food. The petition argues, in essence,
    that the response to the drought situation by central and state
    governments, in terms of both policy and implementation, constitutes
    a clear violation of this right. The bulk of the petition attempts
    to establish this using (government and field-based) data from
    Rajasthan.\
    The petition points out two aspects of the state's negligence in
    providing food security. The first is the breakdown of the public
    distribution system (PDS). The failures of the PDS arise at various
    levels: its availability has been restricted to families living
    below the poverty line (BPL), yet the monthly quota per family
    cannot meet the nutritional standards set by the Indian Council of
    Medical Research (ICMR). Even this is implemented erratically: a
    survey in Rajasthan indicated that only one-third of the sample
    villages had regular distribution in the preceding three months,
    with no distribution at all in one-sixth of them. The identification
    of BPL households is also highly unreliable. All in all, the
    assistance provided to BPL households through the PDS amounted to
    less than INR 5 per person per month.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_95]: Kalyani Ramnath, ‘‘We the People’:
    Seamless Webs and Social Revolution in India’s Constituent Assembly
    Debates’, *South Asia Research* 32.1 (2012): 58.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_96]: Ramnath, ‘‘We the People’’, p. 59.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_97]: Ramnath, ‘‘We the People’’, p. 61.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_98]: Ramnath, ‘‘We the People’’, pp. 61, 66.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_99]: Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
    Notification on changes to the Information Technology Act, 2000,
    issued on 11 April 2011,
    https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/GSR3\_10511%281%29.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_100]: Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Justice B.N.
    Srikrishna, *A Free and Fair Digital Economy*, Chapter 1-C.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_101]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 194.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_102]: Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2019, Section
    6-iii-c, https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2019/210355.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_103]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 170.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_104]: Jayal, *Citizenship and its Discontents*, p. 194.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_105]: The United Progressive Alliance or UPA is a coalition of parties
    formed soon after the 2004 general election.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_106]: Devesh Kapur, Partha Mukhopadhyay and
    Arvind Subramanian, ‘The Case for Direct Cash Transfers to the
    Poor’, *Economic & Political Weekly* 43.15 (2008): 37–43.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_107]: Kapur et al., ‘The Case for Direct Cash Transfers’, p. 38.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_108]: Kapur et al., ‘The Case for Direct Cash Transfers’, p. 39.
    Emphasis is mine.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_109]: Partha Chatterjee, ‘Democracy and
    Economic Transformation in India’, *Economic & Political Weekly*
    43.16 (2008): 53–62.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_110]: Chatterjee, ‘Democracy and Economic Transformation in India’, p.
    2.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_111]: Chatterjee, ‘Democracy and Economic Transformation in India’,
    pp. 57, 62.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_112]: Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019. For details, see
    https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2019/214646.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_113]: Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National
    Identity Cards) Rules, 2003,
    https://censusindia.gov.in/2011-Act&Rules/notifications/citizenship\_rules2003.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_114]: See Gopal Krishna, ‘Where is WIPRO’s ‘Strategic Vision on the
    UIDAI Project’ Document?’, *Countercurrents*, 7 August 2011,
    https://www.countercurrents.org/krishna070811.htm.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_115]: Expert Committee on Metadata and Data Standards, ‘Personal
    Identification Codification’, Draft version 8, August 2008.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_116]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, Section 7.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_117]: UIDAI, *UIDAI Strategy Overview*, Section 3.2.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_118]: *Puttaswamy* v *UOI*, Section 9 (ii).

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_119]: ‘UIDAI to Share Data with Police for Investigations’, *The
    Hindu*, 6 February 2013,
    https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/uidai-to-share-data-with-police-for-investigations/article4383068.ece.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_120]: For Ambedkar, she says, the four premises of political democracy
    were: first, that the individual is an end in himself; second, that
    the individual has inalienable rights guaranteed by the
    Constitution; third, that the individual should not have to
    relinquish any of these rights as a condition of receiving a
    privilege; and, fourth, that the state should not delegate its
    powers to private persons to govern others. See Jayal, *Citizenship
    and its Discontents*, p. 148.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_121]: Jayal writes: ‘This accounts for the preoccupation, in the
    political discourse of late colonial India, with specifying exactly
    how, on what terms, and to what extent the relationship of the
    citizen to the state may be mediated by community. The idea that
    communities possessed political agency found articulation in their
    negotiations with the colonial state for a greater institutional
    presence, with political and legislative representation being viewed
    as the preeminent form that citizenship could take’. See Jayal,
    *Citizenship and its Discontents*, pp. 199–200.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_122]: See the legal services advice being offered here:
    http://www.legalservicesindia.com/article/2316/Meaning-and-Kind-of-Person.html.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_123]: Sudipta Kaviraj, ‘The Imaginary Institution of India’, in
    Sudipta Kaviraj, *The Imaginary Institution of India: Politics and
    Ideas*, New York: Columbia University Press, 2010, p. 199.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_124]: Kaviraj, ‘The Imaginary Institution of India’, p. 201.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_125]: Although certain kinds of unsourced speech have been legally
    recognized (e.g., rumor or fake news) – and dealt with by holding
    the carriers of such speech responsible (e.g., newspapers or after
    the Information Technology Rules, 2011 that defined digital
    ‘intermediaries’, email, hosting, and blogging services) – as well
    as certain modes of sourced but not conscious or responsible speech
    (e.g. in 2010 when the Supreme Court banned Deception Detection
    Tests like polygraph, narcoanalysis, and brain-mapping), these did
    not exhaust the problems posed by diffuse speech.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_126]: Eric Barendt, *Freedom of Speech*, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
    1985, pp. 26–27.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_127]: Kaviraj, ‘The Imaginary Institution of India’, p. 200.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_128]: https://smg.media.mit.edu/library/dibbell1993.html

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_129]: Also discussed in more detail by Nishant Shah in his essay in
    this volume.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_130]: Section 66 of the IT Act (‘Hacking with computer system’):
    ‘Whoever with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to
    cause wrongful loss or damage to the public or any person destroys
    or deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource
    or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously by any
    means, commits hack’. For details, see
    https://www.meity.gov.in/content/offences.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_131]: Open Source Center Media Aid, *Overview of Leading Indian Social
    Media*, 21 December 2010,
    https://fas.org/irp/dni/osc/india-social.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_132]: Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pink\_Chaddi\_Campaign.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_133]: https://cis-india.org/internet-governance/resources/section-66A-information-technology-act.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_134]: Mayank Jain, ‘Mamata is Suppressing all Dissent, Claims Jadavpur Professor Arrested for Sharing a Cartoon’, *Scroll*, 12 March 2015, https://scroll.in/article/712933/mamata-is-suppressing-all-dissent-claims-jadavpur-professor-arrested-for-sharing-a-cartoon. 

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_135]: See ‘Youth has Confessed to Operating Pro-IS Twitter Account:
    Karnataka DGP’, *Free Press Journal*, 1 June 2019,
    https://www.freepressjournal.in/india/youth-has-confessed-to-operating-pro-is-twitter-account-karnataka-dgp.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_136]: ‘ISIS Propagandist Shami Witness: Man Charged in India, Channel 4, 1 June 2015, https://www.channel4.com/news/isis-shami-witness-medhi-masroor-biswas-charged.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_137]: *Shreya Singhal* v *UOI*, WP (Criminal) No. 167 of 2012, (24
    March 2015), https://indiankanoon.org/doc/110813550/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_138]: These are: (1) the sovereignty and integrity of India, (2) the
    security of the State, (3) friendly relations with foreign States,
    (4) public order, (5) decency (6) morality or in relation to
    contempt of court, (7) defamation (8) incitement to an offence. See
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/493243/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_139]: Shuddhabrata Sengupta, ‘Media Trials
    and Courtroom Tribulations: The Battle of Images, Words and Shadows
    in the 13 December Case’, in *13 December, A Reader: The Strange
    Case of the Attack on the Indian Parliament*, New Delhi: Penguin
    Books, 2006.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_140]: *M Siddiq (D) Thr Lrs* v *Mahant Suresh Das & Ors*, Civil
    Appeals Nos 10866-10867 of 2010 (2019),
    https://www.sci.gov.in/pdf/JUD\_2.pdf.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_141]: Paul Bischoff, ‘Which Government Censors the Tech Giants the
    Most?’, 19 October 2021,
    https://www.comparitech.com/blog/vpn-privacy/tech-giant-censorship/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_142]: *Faheema Shirin R.K.* v *State of Kerala*, WP (C) 19716/2019-L
    (19 September 2019), https://indiankanoon.org/doc/188439981/;
    *Banashree Gogoi* v *Union of India and 7 Ors*, GAHC010310492019,
    Case No. : PIL 78/2019 (19 December 2019),
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/175955438/; *Anuradha Bhasin* v *Union
    of India*, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1031 of 2019 (10 January 2020),
    https://indiankanoon.org/doc/82461587/; *Foundation for Media
    Professionals* v *Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir*, Writ
    Petition (Civil) of 2020 (D. No. 10817 of 2020) (11 May 2020),
    (https://indiankanoon.org/doc/123992151/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_143]: Esha Roy, ‘As Nine Bodies Await Burial, Manipur Trenched in
    Politics of Dead and Living’, *Indian Express*, 29 August 2016,

    https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/manipur-violence-protests-in-churachandpur-manipur-deaths-2999507/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_144]: In South Asia, the term *hartal* refers to the closure of shops
    and offices as a protest or mark of sorrow.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_145]: Divya Trivedi, ‘Anuradha Bhasin: ‘Impossible for Journalists to
    Function’, *Frontline*, 27 September 2019,

    https://frontline.thehindu.com/cover-story/impossible-for-journalists-to-function/article29382196.ece.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_146]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 75.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_147]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 8B: Contentions.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_148]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 8B: Contentions.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_149]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 24.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_150]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 152: Conclusion.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_151]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 152: Conclusion.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_152]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, No. 140.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_153]: Soumyarendra Barik, ‘2G Internet on Postpaid, Broadband
    Partially Restored in J&K for Accessing Only ‘White-Listed’
    Websites’, Medianama, 15 January 2020,

    <https://www.medianama.com/2020/01/223-partial-internet-restoration-jammu-kashmir/>.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_154]: *Bhasin* v *UOI*, Nos 146, 147, 148.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_155]: People’s Union of Civil Liberties, *Imprisoned Resistance - 5th
    August and its Aftermath*, 2019,
    https://www.pucl.org/reports/imprisoned-resistance-5th-august-and-its-aftermath.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_156]: Manuel Castells, *Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements
    in the Internet Age*, Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2015, p. 57.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_157]: Castells, *Networks of Outrage and Hope*, p. 10.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_158]: Castells, *Networks of Outrage and Hope*, p. 15.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_159]: A 2011 movement in Spain, of major protests, demonstrations, and
    occupations against austerity policies, which began around local and
    regional elections. While the issue was local, it pioneered (and
    lent its name to) a new and increasingly global mode of networked
    protest.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_160]: Castells, *Networks of Outrage and Hope*, p. 132.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_161]: G. Arunima, ‘Cameras, Campuses and the Future of Politics in an
    Era of Imaging Technologies’, *Contributions to Indian Sociology*
    54.1 (2020): 16.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_162]: Arunima, ‘Cameras, Campuses and the Future of Politics', pp.
    17–18.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_163]: Pramod K. Verma, Architecting Platforms for Innovation

    <https://www.slideshare.net/indiastack/architecting-platforms-for-innovation>

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_164]: Aditi Agrawal, ‘Aarogya Setu Will Include Telemedicine, Greater
    Personalisation; May Act as Building Block for India Health Stack’,
    Medianama, 22 April 2020,
    https://www.medianama.com/2020/04/223-aarogya-setu-upcoming-features/.

[^06AshishRajadhayksha_165]: August 2022 update: the draft Personal Data Protection Bill has
    been officially withdrawn by the government, and sent back to the
    drawing board.