---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Annotated Timeline

[]{#_Hlk112345062 .anchor}Timelines are chronological devices, giving
the impression of progress. Yet, the timeline of events that we curate
here is less to depict a story of progress or disrepair, and more to
portray a snapshot of defining moments in the public life of the digital
encounters that we trace in this book. These moments appear in the form
of letters, court judgements, plans and policies, working together with
the archive, provide something of a window into the key problems that
motivate this book. They coalesce around the total and unprecedented
re-organization of social and political life that has been mediated by
digital technologies. Every event in this timeline thus points to an
upheaval in the order of things, producing new problems in the world,
and, for us, new opportunity to excavate the life-worlds of
techno-political interventions.

Consider this timeline a roving flashlight then, selectively
illuminating the torrid twenty years of digital governance and its
prequel. It is not intended to be comprehensive. It is a curatorial
accompaniment to the text, showcasing our authorial choices, our reading
of the past. It is at the same time an invitation to readers to unpick
up these moments, chart their own genealogies and, of course, to add to
them. Some interventions are more well-known than others. The
lesser-known ones are equally critical to our story of why the past
twenty years need the attention and space this book offers.

**1975: The National Informatics Center (NIC) is set up.** An
institution that brought irreversible change to the information
generating and organizing capacities of the government, the NIC was set
up under the Department of Electronics to digitize government offices.
NIC’s founder Narasimhiah Seshagiri developed an internet before the
Internet to create a distributed network of information sharing offices.
In many important ways, this book (and the third essay in particular)
tracks the excesses of this pioneering ambition.

**1976: Jaswanth Krishnayya’s May 15 1976 *aide memoire* to the Planning
Commission on setting up ‘information systems and a computerized data
bank’**. A systems thinker, Krishnayya may be considered as a prototype
of today's ubiquitous management consultant of the sort dotting
government offices. But, as is revealed in this defining letter,
Krishnayya wasn’t just purveying technology to the civil servants of
India’s Planning Commission. He was offering a paradigm shift, an
ontological change in the information gathering and organizing model of
government, a vision that game to define the material transformation in
the sinews of government. This is a rare opportunity to glimpse the
thought-work that accompanied digital change, something that is lost as
technology interventions become more ‘plug and play’ in the decades to
come.

**1984: New Computer Policy of the Department of Electronics**. One of
Rajiv Gandhi first decisions on taking over Prime Ministership was to
afford special status to the information technology industry, laying the
foundations for the famous IT revolution a decade later. The New
Computer Policy included reduced import duties for peripherals, foreign
equity participation, liberalized import of computers and recognition of
software as a separate industry, setting up the informational
infrastructure that forms the background in this book.

**1998: Launch of the Simputer by four scientists from the Indian
Institute of Science**. This was low-cost, smart-card-compliant,
handheld end-user device using the IMLI (or ‘information mark-up
language interface’) on a touchscreen intended to revolutionise a
digital grassroots in India. According to Vijay Chandru, one of the four
founders, it was imagined alongside two other equally revolutionary
inventions, one, the Wireless-in-Local-Loop (WLL) technology set up in
2001 as part of the SARI (Sustainable Access in Rural India) project of
Ashok Jhunjhunwala at the Indian institute of Technology, Chennai, often
seen as the moment when mobile telephony took root in India, with kiosks
providing telephone, Internet and other stand-alone computer services to
villagers, and in 2002 of computational linguistics with the Language
Technologies Research Centre at the Indian Institute of Informational
Technology. Together, these were going to be the technologies for
democratizing information in India.

In many ways, the problems of the Simputer were not hardware or design
problems. They were, rather, that the digital ecosystem – like Aadhaar,
for instance – had not yet been built. They were a cog without a wheel,
without a system to support it. The Simputer nevertheless proved to be a
key antecedent to complex e-governance systems, anticipating a complex
legal ecosystem including, for example, the draft Personal Data
Protection Bill, 2019.

**1999: DISNIC-PLAN, A NICNET Based Distributed Database for Micro-level
Planning.** The first attempt to connect offices and introduce real time
relay of data from the 200+ districts of India to the headquarters of
the Planning Commission in Delhi. This was a distributed database,
pre-empting relational database management systems. This book has
explored the geography of this network, as it aimed to make data mobile
and yet curtail its movement by mirroring the hierarchical structure of
government. Debates around the localization of data, which is referenced
across the chapters of this book, are reminiscent of this pioneering
model of containing data within the geography of the district.

**1999: New Telecom Policy.** NICNet, established by the National
Informatics Centre in 1995, as an inter-operability platform between
government institutions, was also accompanied by the availability of the
first public Internet service on 15^th^ August 1995, by the Videsh
Sanchar Nigam Limited (VSNL). In 1999, the New Telecom Policy spelled
out Universal Services as among its main objectives, leading to India
becoming a signatory to the USOF (Universal Services Obligation Fund),
receiving funds to encourage universal access. In 2003, the USO was
given statutory status, and in 2004 the Broadband policy act further
consolidated the idea that digital connectivity is a fundamental right.
It is important to emphasise that the history of universal access is and
should remain central state responsibility, and that the current idea of
universal access as administered by private telecoms, as in the
partnership with Reliance Jio or the backdoor negotiation with Free
Basics are an abdication of state responsibility to offer universal
access and obligatory services.

**2000: Information Technology Act passed.** Although a technological
regulation document, this Act is clearly an origin point of cultural and
political expressions of technology. Throughout the book, across the
essays, the different conditions of access, expression, speech,
security, and integrity keep on drawing from this earliest historical
document about regulation of the Internet. See especially its Section 3
on Electronic Governance, its licensing structure for electronic
certification, its Section 43 announcing draconian penalties for
‘computer contaminants’, its cyber-regulation structure, its section 66
that brought the concept of ‘hacking’ for the first time into legal
terminology, its emphasis on ‘sovereignty and integrity of India’, and
finally its outlining of ‘service providers’ and their accountability.
Subsequent annotations and amendments merely reinforce the centrality
that ICTs have gained in imagining the apparatus of a digital India. It
is important to trace many of the cultural, organisational, and
bureaucratic events back to this Act that sought to contain and control
the then emerging Internet networks.

**2003: The revised Citizenship Amendment Act**. This is the Act that
first conceives the Rules on Registration of Citizens and Issue of
National Identity Cards that would become the National Population
Register. The 2003 Rules were the first time when a ‘Local Register of
Indian Citizens’ was defined, when ‘individuals whose Citizenship is
doubtful’ would be weeded out. It was also the first time that illegal
migrants or foreigners become central to defining citizenship.

**2005: The Right to Information Act.** This Act, though not quite about
the digital technologies or infrastructure is critical in understanding
the expectations and the ambitions of building a nation-wide internet
infrastructure. RTI forced the government to recognise digital platforms
as the only way of giving access to public information, thus
precipitating massive digital reforms and e-governance initiatives in
the very working of governments. It also suddenly changed government
bureaucracy, replacing older structures with several new agents, using
database logics to produce new interfaces and transactions for spreading
of information. The institution of RTI also led to concerns around
privacy, because a non-discrete scrutiny of public information could, it
became apparent, lead to adverse consequences for those who had not
consented for their data to be used beyond a particular context.

**2006. The Personal Data Protection Bill.** The PDP, introduced to the
Rajya Sabha in 2006, was the first recognition of the unregulated nature
of personal data online. The Bill significantly anticipates and
identifies the ways in which personal data can be harvested,
consolidated, and often weaponised against users, in ways both
unpredictable and uncontrollable. Ironically the PDP Bill was targeted
at private use of citizen data but did not pose any questions to the
state’s own ambitions of data surveillance and extraction. Thus, the
most vulnerable data subjects – the YOUsers caught in the matrices of
digitalisation – remained without agency and understanding of what
happens to their data and how it can be used against them.

**2006. National E-Governance Plan** An ambitious and multi-pronged plan
to digitize various facets of governance, radically re-imagining the
location and scale at which government would operate. Aadhaar (see
below) might be its most experiential and controversial project, but the
plan, as a whole, marshalled a new technological architecture that
included service centre nodes, fibre-optic networks and stable data
centres. The NeGP, as it came to be known, offers some of the best
instances of RDBMS-led datafication of government, and is frequently
upgraded with new ways of reconfiguring service. It is thus a historical
index to track the development of techno-legal mechanisms for the
practice of government and the re-figuration of the individual as a
citizen-recipient.

**2006**. **Orkut’s multi-lingual Indian iteration**. The moment of the
introduction of social media in India. Within the next four years India
had 83 million internet users, sixty percent of whom had some kind of
social media existence. Although Orkut led the way it would have a short
shelf life, being replaced within two years on the frontlines by
Facebook.

**2007: RSBY (Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, or National Health
Insurance Scheme) announced as a cashless Mediclaim for the poor.** One
of the first experiments to convert the slew of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes to move to the cashless system, this health insurance system for
the poor was imagining over multiple financial gateways of e-commerce
and payments. It also introducing the idea of digital money to a largely
disconnected population. A history of the Internet in India is also
perhaps the history of shaping the image of the benefactor, and
experimenting in their onboarding onto the Internet by shifting their
basic services online, as we have seen both in the case of
demonetization as well as Aadhaar.

**2008: Amendments to the IT ACT – the presentation of cyber security.**
These amendments primarily addressed cyber-security. The first
conversations around data transfer and safety, for which the 2004 Delhi
Public School User Generated Pornography case was a central marker,
resurfaced and found a resolution in these amendments. Of particular
interest for this book are the sections that look at cyber-security, not
in terms of keeping users safe but to keep data safe *from* users, and
from their ability to corrupt, steal or manipulate digital data. The
legacy of controlling users in order to keep the technologies safe,
unfolds in many of the cases in this book, including ‘Whatsapp Lynch
Mobs’ – where social media platform, ascribed both responsibility and
accountability, in turn starts a ‘user literacy’ campaign to control
user behaviour. Cyber security is critical also because it began
allowing dissident voices to be examined from a national data security
lens, bringing in new layers of control and silencing.

**2008: Second Administrative Reform Commission, Eleventh Report,
Promoting e-Governance.** Another landmark in the turn towards
datafication of government. Dedicating an entire report to electronic
governance at the same time as the appearance of the NeGP (see above),
suggests not just a firm resolve to a digital transition, but also the
digital reform of Indian administration as a whole. E-governance became
a relay point through which corporate and managerial idioms of
transparency and efficiency, would shift from government to governance.
It followed a series of financial crises during the late 1980s, and now
planned for a new organizational structure that would shrink bureaucracy
to the backend, foregrounding instead new bridges between service
centres and clients. A managerial ideal of heightened efficiency
suggested not so much a transformation as a transcendence of politics.

**2009**: **Launch of Aadhar**. In February of this month, the Unique
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) was started, initially within
the Planning Commission, with former Infosys co-founded and CEO Nandan
Nilekani in charge. A year earlier Nilekani had published his book
*Imagining India: Ideas for the New Century*, which had laid out several
of the revolutionary concepts around portable and bodily identity for
every Indian resident, that he would now be tasked with implementing.
The first UIDAI Working Paper, *Creating a Unique Identity for Every
Resident in India*, effectively outlines a new biopolitical definition
of residency, by ensuring repeatedly that the Aadhar number would be
itself a dumb number containing no intelligence; it was not an identity
card; and it was portable.

**2009: DoT issued blockage of porn websites.** Pornography has been one
of the poster children for Internet regulation. The Department of
Telecommunication’s continued attempts at blocking porn and censoring
‘obscene content’ has continually been rebuffed, and has never quite
worked. The 2009 blocking of porn websites was the first national
attempt that showed the inefficacy of content filtering online, and also
the power of distributed content networks which could easily surpass the
different content filters, as is discussed in the case of the Savita
Bhabhi controversies. In many ways, the failure at content filtering and
censorship can be seen as the trigger point for the government mediators
to start looking at other forms of information shaping which lead to the
reliance on Internet shutdowns and information blackouts as blanket
strategies for blocking and censoring information.

**2011: Intermediary Liability Act**. A major moment in the arrival of
new telecom companies as performers of state-like activities, this Act.
saw a new tacit arrangement of the public and the private in which
social media platforms, made liable for the actions of their users, got
enfranchised as independent and autonomous bodies of governance with
Terms of Service taking precedence over independent judgements on
censorship and agency. Not only did this produce a chilling effect, as
self-censorship and arbitrary blocking became common, but it also
registered new ways in which these companies began to lobby for and
shape the future of the Internet, as in the Free Basics campaign and the
fight to retain Net Neutrality. The Intermediary Liability Act also
needs to be recognised as the precursor to the regimes of Internet
blackouts and shutdowns, and disconnection which superseded the
safeguards against censorship in older media technology regulations.

**2015: Digital India campaign launched**. Major initiative rhetorically
linking digital technologies with national identity. Like many countries
that have become production and service hubs for global IT industries,
this campaign was focussed on the economic wealth that global
outsourcing can bring the country. Digital India started ostentatiously,
as an economic alliance and collaboration building project, but it also
suggested a new kind of intentionality on the part of the state.
Activities that were seen to be using digital technologies to disrupt,
question, or challenge the overt intentionalities of development and
economic wealth-creation, were seen as problematic and even traitorous
(threatening to the ‘security and integrity of India’). This extended to
arrests of activists, institutional prohibitions including harassment of
digital groups demanding social justice, and governmental crackdowns on
dissenting voices and communities.

**2015: The landmark ‘Shreya Singhal’ judgment**. A second-year law
student, outraged by the arrest of two young women for putting up (or
simply ‘liking’) Facebook posts, challenged the draconian section 66A of
the Information Technology Act, and won. That amendment, which had taken
direct aim at social media in threatening imprisonment to anyone sending
‘information that is grossly offensive’ or ‘causing annoyance,
inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal
intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will’ via ‘a computer, computer
system, computer resource or communication device including attachments
in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record’, was
struck down by the Court. However, the Court retained the equally
draconian 69A that authorized the government to block any information
‘in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of
India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or
public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any
cognizable offence’. A growing split in the two halves of the
‘reasonable restrictions’ on the right to free speech became
increasingly clear, defining the uses of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act and the conditions under which preventive detention
began to be used.

**2016: Prohibition of Discriminatory Tariffs for Data Services
Regulation.** India does not have any specific legislations regarding
Net Neutrality. However, in 2016, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India (TRAI) passed this new regulation after public consultations about
the regulatory framework for Over-the-top (OTT) services. This
effectively makes net neutrality a fundamental right and aligns India
with many other countries that seek to keep the Internet services
neutral and agnostic to the kinds of use and user. This regulation came
into effect because of the ways in which private corporations (Airtel in
2014, Free Basics in 2015) were trying to fork the Indian Internet into
basic and luxury services, intending to create a multi-tier userbase
with differing advantages and services.

**2016: The India Stack takes shape**, taking Aadhar into a new era of
‘presenceless, paperless, cashless and consent’, with the launch of
United Payments Interface (UPI), catapulting India into the age of
digital payments. UPI works on increasingly integrating the banking
system with a real-time mobile payments system, to to enable
interoperability between money custodians, payment rails and front-end
payment applications. Aadhar’s API is increasingly made available to
build larger numbers of apps.

**2017 – K.S. Puttuswamy Judgment on the right to privacy**. In
asserting such a right, the Supreme Court came up with several new
conceptions of the biopolitical subject, now defined as a ‘natural
person’ who possesses a bodily right to privacy, which is ‘a natural
right’ and ‘inalienable’. It was also at the same time transactable,
thus laying the foundations for data exchange and commodification. It is
an underlying current through this book that the regulation around data
privacy and data security also contribute to the regimes of data
surveillance and data capitalisation by enforcing data as discrete
computational set that create the user in what we are calling a YouSer.

**2017: Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or
Public Safety) Rules, 2017, amendment to the 1855 Telegraph Act.**
Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) allows local
magistrates to direct properties like cellphones and mobile towers to be
used in specific ways. The PAAS agitations in Gujarat was the first time
that the Internet telecommunication was included under this, and
infrastructure regulation was used as a way of information spreading.
This was challenged in court and eventually, in 2017, the Telecom
Internet Suspension Rules were formulated and codified as a part of the
Telegraph Act, which made it possible for Internet shutdowns to be
normalized, making India top the lists of the longest and largest number
of Internet shutdowns in the world. Under the Telegraph Act amendment,
shutdowns are often seen as modes of limiting speech, but its origin in
the CrPC is a stark reminder that this is an infrastructure shaping that
curtails free speech and a new form of censorship and control through
infrastructural development.

**2018: K.S. Puttaswamy Judgment on Aadhar**: the landmark judgment on
the validity of the Aadhar Act is best remembered for Justice D.Y.
Chandrachud’s dissenting judgment. While the Act was passed, Chandrachud
outlined a grim picture in which, for all the emphasis on privacy and
data protection, when rights that are ‘freely exercised, liberties
freely enjoyed, entitlements granted by the Constitution and laws’
become *‘*conditional, on a compulsory barter’, then the ‘barter compels
the citizens to give up their biometrics ‘voluntarily’, allow their
biometrics and demographic information to be stored by the State and
private operators and then used for a process termed ‘authentication’’.
It also allows for an extraordinary ability of the state to perform
‘civil death’ through turning off a digital resource at will.

**2018: M/S United India Insurance… vs Jai Prakash Tayal (26^th^ Feb
2018).** A case on genetic data privacy and the weaponization of
individual genetic data became an unlikely focal point to connect
technological data and biological data to ensure protection for the
individual. Digital data is often seen as discrete and separate from the
embodied user that it refers to and, in this judgement, data (digital or
otherwise) was established as intrinsic to the privacy and integrity of
a person. The establishment of data as thus fundamental to personhood,
leads to interesting questions around bodily security, safety, and
individual safety in the face of continued data leaks and instances of
trolling and doxing online. It perhaps can be seen as the first
recognition of a Youser – a combination of multiple data streams – and
its negotiations with agency and autonomy in the complex field of data
regulation and security.

**2019: Personal Data Protection Bill based on the committee
recommendations led by Justice B.N. Srikrishna**. It contains the
government of India’s most recent response to the kinds of data
overload, creep and excesses that this book aims to document. It sought
to create a legal framework for the protection of personal data, through
the creation of data fiduciaries and, more starkly, by proposing
localization strategies to contain data within the geographic boundaries
of the nation. In the ensuing public debate, some saw data localisation
as an attempt to bring back the rule of law to our digital and datafied
existence, whereas for others, this was an extension of the long arm of
the state as a mode of surveillance or economic protectionism. Against
the long-standing attempts by the government to secure data, starting in
the 1970s, where the mobility of data was never compromised, this latest
intervention suggests limiting the spread of data. As such, it is
reminiscent of old information architectures that mapped data onto
specific categories, such as the ‘district’. As far as government’s
access to data is concerned, the situation has not changed much from the
prior version of the Bill (see above), where the government continues to
have unchecked access to public and personal data. As of the moment of
completing this book, the Bill has been withdrawn and will be
fundamentally redrafted.

**2019: Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas** (‘The support of all,
the advancement of all, the faith of all’). The slogan adopted by the
Bharatiya Janata Party in 2019 has led to interesting socio-political
and cultural arguments about who the intended ‘everybody’ is. The
proposition of a ‘greater good for everybody’ has often been used to
reinforce draconian authoritarian and surveillance practices, perhaps
the most visible during the e-management of the covid19 pandemic in
India. The idea that the greater good requires intrusive governance
standards and that development becomes the ambition for all
digitalisation also is used as justification for state generated crises
like demonetization that led to a massive shift towards virtualisation
of the financial ecosystem or extended lockdowns that isolated entire
communities in the case of the abrogation of the constitution and
reformulation of Kashmir, clearly show how the Internet is often used as
a means of defining the greater good that fits specific political
expressions of control and power.

**2019: The revised Unlawful Activities (Prevention Act)** specifically
targets individuals as terrorists. A new kind of individual is born,
alongside the ‘natural person’ and the ‘data principal’. Together with
the further amendment to the Citizenship Act, now targeting Muslims with
its own ruling that only migrants who entered India from ‘Afghanistan,
Bangladesh or Pakistan… before the 31st day of December, 2014’ would be
allowed if they ‘belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or
Christian community’, and the National Register of Citizenship, this led
to major protests across India, and especially in Delhi.

**2020 – Anuradha Bhasin vs. Union of India and Ors** The landmark
judgement from the Supreme court upheld that blanket Internet shutdowns
were constitutional breaches because they hampered the fundamental
rights of self-determination, commerce, and freedom of speech and
expression. It recognised the Internet has a central and non-optional
infrastructure in contemporary acts of being and realising one’s
citizenship and hence deemed Internet shutdowns illegal. It thus
introduced the language of necessity and proportionality on to the
regulation of the Internet infrastructure, and particularly Internet
access. It also established that the Internet has a peculiar
relationship with crises: It generates them and is also the tool for
making interventions in times of crises, and that the very act of being
online might be seen as entering a state of crisis. This is particularly
critical to understanding that access to technology, which is often
heralded as a universal right, is inherently suspicious and hence needs
to be controlled with greater discretion, through public and private
means, enabling both governments and private corporations to capitalise
on different forms of Internet infrastructure regulation.

**2021: New Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code “2021
Rules” establish two provisions for content moderation and regulation on
the Internet in India: Rule 4(4) on Content Filtering Mandate and Rule
4(2) on Traceability Mandate.** The question of misinformation and
conspiracy theories, accelerated by the supposition that all information
is now subject to relative truth value, leads to these draconian
principles. The Content Filtering Mandate overrides all end-to-end
encryption and allows all digital content to be offered for review to
authority. The traceability mandate emphasises the ‘real name’
principles that social media giants have already enforced on users, and
‘enables the identification of the first originator of the information
on its computer resource’, thus implementing the 2009 Decryption Rules
that allow authorities to request interception or monitoring of any
decrypted digital information. These technological solutions claim to
not compromise the K.S. Puttaswamy judgement that establishes the right
of privacy as a fundamental right and allows new forms of information
overload management tools and systems for the government. The monitoring
of contemptuous comments, as in the case of the Agrima-Mishra
controversy, or the prosecution of individuals who have made critical
comments as in the case of Kanhaiya Kumar, were precursors to the
establishment of these rules and show how these draconian measures are
slowly leading to erasure of free-speech rights.
